<p>To <br/> my Father</p>

<p class="salutation">My dear Father,</p>

<p>I know of nobody who likes a detective story
more than you do, with the possible exception of
myself. So if I write one and you read it, we
ought to be able to amuse ourselves at any rate.</p>

<p>I hope you will notice that I have tried to make
the gentleman who eventually solves the mystery
behave as nearly as possible as he might be
expected to do in real life. That is to say, he is very
far removed from a sphinx and he does make a
mistake or two occasionally. I have never believed
very much in those hawk-eyed, tight-lipped gentry,
who pursue their silent and inexorable way straight
to the heart of things without ever once
overbalancing or turning aside after false goals; and I
cannot see why even a detective story should not
aim at the creation of a natural atmosphere, just
as much as any other work of the lighter fiction.</p>

<p>In the same way I should like you to observe
that I have set down quite plainly every scrap of
evidence just as it is discovered, so that the reader
has precisely the same data at his disposal as has
the detective. This seems to me the only fair way of
doing things. To hold up till the last chapter some
vital piece of evidence (which, by the way, usually
renders the solution of the puzzle perfectly simple),
and to achieve your surprise by allowing the
detective to arrest his man before the evidence on
which he is doing so is ever so much as hinted to
the reader at all, is, to my mind, most decidedly
not playing the game.</p>

<p>With which short homily, I hand the book over
to you by way of some very slight return for all that
you have done for me.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch01">

<h2>CHAPTER I. <br/> Eight o’Clock in the Morning</h2>

<p>William, the gardener at Layton Court, was a
man of melancholy deliberation.</p>

<p>It did not pay, William held, to rush things;
especially the important things of life, such as the
removal of greenfly from roses. Before action was
taken, the matter should be studied, carefully and
unhappily, from every possible point of view,
particularly the worst.</p>

<p>On this summer’s morning William had been
gazing despondently at the roses for just over three
quarters of an hour. Pretty soon now he would
feel himself sufficiently fortified to begin operations
on them.</p>

<p>“Do you always count the greenfly before you
slaughter them, friend William?” asked a sudden
voice behind him.</p>

<p>William, who had been bending forward to peer
gloomily into the greenfly-blown intricacies of
a <i>Caroline Testout</i>, slewed hastily about. He hated
being accosted at the best of times, but there was a
spontaneous heartiness about this voice which
grated intolerably on all his finer feelings. The
added fact that the act of slewing hastily about
had brought a portion of his person into sharp and
painful contact with another rose bush did not tend
to make life any more cheerful for William at that
moment.</p>

<p>“Weren’t a-countin’ em,” he observed curtly;
and added naughtily under his breath, “Drat that
there Mr. Sheringham!”</p>

<p>“Oh! I thought you must be totting up the bag
in advance,” remarked the newcomer gravely from
behind an enormous pipe. “What’s your record
bag of greenfly, William? Runs into thousands of
brace, I suppose. Well, no doubt it’s an interesting
enough sport for people of quiet tastes. Like
stamp-collecting. You ever collect stamps, William?”</p>

<p>“Noa,” said William, gazing sombrely at a
worm. William was not one of your chatty
conversationalists.</p>

<p>“Really?” replied his interlocutor with interest.
“Mad on it myself once. As a boy, of course.
Silly game though, really, I agree with you.” He
followed the direction of William’s eyes. “Ah,
the early morning worm!” he continued brightly.
“And defying all the rules of its calling by refusing
to act as provender for the early bird. Highly
unprofessional conduct! There’s a lesson for all of us in
that worm, William, if I could only think what it
is. I’ll come back and tell you when I’ve had time
to go into the matter properly.”</p>

<p>William grunted moodily. There were many
things in this world of which William disapproved;
but Mr. Roger Sheringham had a class all to
himself. The gospel of laughter held no attractions for
that stern materialist and executioner of
greenfly.</p>

<p>Roger Sheringham remained singularly
unperturbed by the sublime heights of William’s
disapproval. With hands thrust deep into the pockets
of a perfectly incredible pair of gray flannel
trousers he sauntered off among the rose beds,
cheerfully poisoning the fragrant atmosphere with
clouds of evil smoke from the peculiarly unsavoury
pipe which he wore in the corner of his rather wide
mouth. William’s eloquent snorts followed him
unheeded; Roger had already forgotten William’s
existence.</p>

<p>There are many who hold that eight o’clock in
the morning is the most perfect time of a summer’s
day. The air, they advance, is by that time only
pleasantly warmed through, without being burned
to a cinder as it is an hour or two later. And there
is still quite enough dew sparkling upon leaf and
flower to give the poets plenty to talk about
without forcing them to rise at six o’clock for their
inspiration. The theory is certainly one well worth
examination.</p>

<p>At the moment when this story opens Mr. Roger
Sheringham was engaged in examining it.</p>

<p>Not that Roger Sheringham was a poet. By no
means. But he was the next worst thing to it—an
author. And it is part of an author’s stock-in-trade
to know exactly what a rose garden looks like at
eight o’clock on a summer morning—that and
everything else in the world besides. Roger Sheringham
was refreshing his mental notes on the subject.</p>

<p>While he is doing so let us turn the tables by
examining him. We are going to see quite a lot of
him in the near future, and first impressions are
always important.</p>

<p>Perhaps the first thing we notice about him, even
before we have had time to take in his physical
characteristics, is an atmosphere of unbounded,
exuberant energy; Roger Sheringham is evidently
one of those dynamic persons who seem somehow
to live two minutes to everybody else’s one.
Whatever he happens to be doing, he does it as if it were
the only thing that he had ever really intended to
do in life at all. To see him now, looking over this
rose garden, you would think that he is actually
learning it by heart, so absorbedly is he gazing at it.
At least you would be ready to bet that he could
tell you afterwards just how many plants there are
in each bed, how many roses on each plant, and
how many greenfly on each rose. Whether this
habit of observation is natural, or whether it is part
of the training of his craft, there can be no doubt
that Roger possesses it in a very high degree.</p>

<p>In appearance he is somewhat below the average
height, and stockily built; with a round rather than
a long face, and two shrewd, twinkling gray eyes.
The shapeless trousers and the disreputable old
Norfolk jacket he is wearing argue a certain
eccentricity and contempt for convention that is just a
little too self-conscious to be quite natural without
going so far as to degenerate into a pose. The
short-stemmed, big-bowled pipe in the corner of
his mouth seems a very part of the man himself.
Add that his age is over thirty and under forty;
that his school had been Winchester and his
university Oxford; and that he had (or at any rate
professed) the profoundest contempt for his reading
public, which was estimated by his publishers at a
surprisingly large figure—and you have Roger
Sheringham, Esq., at your service.</p>

<p>The sound of footsteps approaching along the
broad gravel path, which separated the rose garden
from the lawn at the back of the house, roused him
from his studious contemplation of early morning
phenomena. The next moment a large, broad-shouldered
young man, with a pleasing and cheerful
face, came into sight round the bend.</p>

<p>“Good heavens!” Roger exclaimed, in tones of
the liveliest consternation. “Alec! And an hour
and a half before it need be! What’s wrong with
you this morning, Alec?”</p>

<p>“I might ask the same of you,” grinned the
young man. “It’s the first time I’ve seen you down
before ten o’clock since we came here.”</p>

<p>“That only gives us three mornings. Still, a
palpable point. By the way, where’s our worthy
host? I thought it was a distressing habit of his
to spend an hour in the garden every morning
before breakfast; at least, so he was telling me at
great length yesterday afternoon.”</p>

<p>“I don’t know,” said Alec indifferently. “But
what brings you here anyway, Roger?”</p>

<p>“Me? Oh, I’ve been working. Studying the
local flora and fauna, the latter ably represented
by William. You know, you ought to cultivate
William, Alec. You’d have a lot in common, I
feel sure.”</p>

<p>They fell into step and strolled among the
scattered beds.</p>

<p>“You working at this hour?” Alec remarked.
“I thought you wrote all your tripe between
midnight and dawn.”</p>

<p>“You’re a young man of singular literary
acuteness,” sighed Roger. “Hardly anybody would dare
to call my work tripe. Yet you and I know that
it is, don’t we? But for goodness’ sake don’t tell
anyone else your opinion. My income depends
on my circulation, you know; and if it once got
noised about that Alexander Grierson
considered——”</p>

<p>Alec landed a punch on the literary thorax.
“Oh, for heaven’s sake, shut up!” he grunted.
“Don’t you ever stop talking, Roger?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Roger admitted regretfully. “When
I’m asleep. It’s a great trial to me. That’s why
I so much hate going to bed. But you haven’t
told me why you’re up and about so early?”</p>

<p>“Couldn’t sleep,” responded Alec, a trifle
sheepishly.</p>

<p>“Ah!” Roger stopped and scrutinised his
companion’s face closely. “I shall have to study you,
Alec, you know. Awfully sorry if it’s going to
inconvenience you; but there’s my duty to the great
British public, and that’s plain enough, my
interesting young lover. So now perhaps you’ll tell me
the real reason why you’re polluting this excellent
garden with your unseemly presence at this
unnecessary hour?”</p>

<p>“Oh, stow it, you blighter!” growled the
interesting young lover, blushing hotly.</p>

<p>Roger regarded him with close attention.</p>

<p>“Notes on the habits of the newly engaged
animal, male genus,” he murmured softly.
“One—reverses all its habits and instincts by getting
up and seeking fresh air when it might still be
frowsting in bed. Two—assaults its closest friends
without the least provocation. Three—turns a
bright brick-red when asked the simplest question.
Four——”</p>

<p>“Will you shut up, or have I got to throw you
into a rose bed?” shouted the harassed Alec.</p>

<p>“I’ll shut up,” said Roger promptly. “But only
on William’s account; please understand that.
I feel that William would simply hate to see me
land on one of his cherished rose bushes. It would
depress him more than ever, and I shrink from
contemplating what that might mean. In passing,
how is it that you were coming from the direction
of the lodge just now and not from the house?”</p>

<p>“You’re infernally curious this morning,” Alec
smiled. “If you want to know, I’ve been down to
the village.”</p>

<p>“So early? Alec, there must be something wrong
with you, after all. And why on earth have you
been down to the village?”</p>

<p>“To—well, if you must have it, to post a letter,”
said Alec reluctantly.</p>

<p>“Ah! A letter so important, so remarkably
urgent that it couldn’t wait for the ordinary
collection from the house?” Roger mused with
interest. “Now I wonder if that letter could have been
addressed, let us say, to <i>The Times</i>? ‘Marvellous,
Holmes! How could you have surmised that?’
‘You know my methods, Watson. It is only necessary
to apply them.’ Well, Alexander Watson, am I
right?”</p>

<p>“You’re not,” said Alec shortly. “It was to my
bookmaker.”</p>

<p>“Well, all I can say is that it ought to have been
to <i>The Times</i>,” retorted Roger indignantly. “In
fact, I don’t mind going so far as to add that it’s
hardly playing the game on your part that it
shouldn’t have been to <i>The Times</i>. Here you go
laying a careful train of facts all pointing to the
conclusion that this miserable letter of yours was
to <i>The Times</i>, and then you turn round and
announce calmly that it was to your bookmaker. If
it comes to that, why write to your bookmaker at
all? A telegram is the correct medium for conducting
a correspondence with one’s bookmaker. Surely
you know that?”</p>

<p>“Doesn’t it ever hurt you?” Alec sighed wearily.
“Don’t you ever put your larynx out of joint or
something? I should have thought that——”</p>

<p>“Yes, I should have liked to hear your little
medical lecture so much,” Roger interrupted
rapidly, with a perfectly grave face. “Unfortunately
a previous engagement of the most pressing
urgency robs me of the pleasure. I’ve just
remembered that I’ve got to go and see a man
about—— Now what was it about? Oh, yes! I remember. A
goat! Well, good-bye, Alec. See you at breakfast, I
hope.”</p>

<p>He seized his astonished companion’s hand,
shook it affectionately, and walked quickly away
in the direction of the village. Alec gazed after
him with open mouth. In spite of the length of
their acquaintance, he had never got quite used to
Roger.</p>

<p>A light tread on the grass behind him caused him
to turn round, and what he saw supplied the reason
for Roger’s hurried departure. A quick smile of
appreciation flitted across his face. Then he hurried
eagerly forward, and all thought of Roger was
wiped from his mind. So soon are we forgotten when
somebody more important comes along.</p>

<p>The girl who was advancing across the grass was
small and slight, with large gray eyes set wide
apart, and a mass of fair hair which the slanting
rays of the sun behind her turned into a bright
golden mist about her head. She was something
more than pretty; for mere prettiness always
implies a certain insipidity, and there was certainly
no trace of that in Barbara Shannon’s face. On
the contrary, the firm lines of her chin alone, to
take only one of her small features, showed a
strength of character unusual in a girl of her age;
one hardly looks for that sort of thing at feminine
nineteen or thereabouts.</p>

<p>Alec caught his breath as he hurried towards her.
It was only yesterday that she had promised to
marry him, and he had not quite got accustomed
to it yet.</p>

<p>“Dearest!” he exclaimed, making as if to take
her in his arms (William had long since disappeared
in search of weapons with which to rout the
greenfly). “Dearest, how topping of you to guess I
should be waiting for you out here!”</p>

<p>Barbara put out a small hand to detain him. Her
face was very grave and there were traces of tears
about her eyes.</p>

<p>“Alec,” she said in a low voice, “I’ve got rather
bad news for you. Something very dreadful has
happened—something that I can’t possibly tell you
about, so please don’t ask me, dear; it would only
make me more unhappy still. But I can’t be
engaged to you any longer. You must just forget
that yesterday ever happened at all. It’s out of
the question now. Alec I—I can’t marry you.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch02">

<h2>CHAPTER II. <br/> An Interrupted Breakfast</h2>

<p>Mr. Victor Stanworth, the host of the little
party now in progress at Layton Court, was,
according to the reports of his friends, who were many
and various, a thoroughly excellent sort of person.
What his enemies thought about him—that is,
provided that he had any—is not recorded. On
the face of it, at any rate, however, the existence
of the latter may be doubted. Genial old gentlemen
of sixty or so, somewhat more than comfortably
well off, who keep an excellent cellar and
equally excellent cigars and entertain with a
large-hearted good humour amounting almost to
open-handedness, are not the sort of people to have
enemies. And all that Mr. Victor Stanworth was;
that, and, perhaps, a trifle more.</p>

<p>If he had one noticeable failing—so slight that
it could hardly be called a fault—it was perhaps
the rather too obvious interest he displayed in the
sort of people whose pictures get into the illustrated
weeklies. Not that Mr. Stanworth was a snob,
or anything approaching it; he would as soon
exchange a joke with a dustman as a duke, though
it is possible that he would prefer a millionaire to
either. But he had not attempted to conceal his
satisfaction when his younger brother, now dead
these ten years or more, had succeeded in marrying
(against all expectation and the more than plainly
expressed wishes of the lady’s family) Lady
Cynthia Anglemere, the eldest daughter of the Earl of
Grassingham. Indeed, he had gone so far as to
express his approval in the eminently satisfactory
form of settling a thousand a year on the lady in
question for so long as she continued to bear the
name of Stanworth. It is noticeable, however,
that a condition of the settlement was the provision
that she should continue the use of her title also.
Gossip, of course, hinted that this interest sprung
from the fact that the origins of the Stanworth
family were themselves not all that they might be;
but whether there was any truth in this or not,
it was beyond question that, whatever these origins
might be, they were by now so decently interred in
such a thick shroud of golden obscurity that
nobody had had either the wish or the patience
to uncover them.</p>

<p>Mr. Stanworth was a bachelor, and it was generally
understood that he was a person of some little
importance in that mysterious Mecca of finance,
the City. Anything further than that was not
specified, a closer definition being rightly held to be
unnecessary. But the curious could find, if they
felt so minded, the name of Mr. Stanworth on the
board of directors of several small but flourishing
and thoroughly respectable little concerns whose
various offices were scattered within a half-mile
radius of the Mansion House. In any case these
did not seem to make any such exorbitant demands
on Mr. Stanworth’s time as to exclude a full
participation in the more pleasant occupations of life.
Two or three days a week in London in the winter,
with sometimes as few as one a fortnight during the
summer, appeared to be quite enough not only to
preserve his financial reputation among his friends,
but also to maintain that large and healthy income
which was a source of such innocent pleasure to so
many.</p>

<p>It has been said already that Mr. Stanworth
was in the habit of entertaining both largely and
broad-mindedly; and this is no less than the truth.
It was his pleasure to gather round him a select
little party of entertaining and cheerful persons,
usually young ones. And each year he rented
a different place in the summer for this purpose;
the larger, the older, and possessing the longer
string of aristocratic connections, the better. The
winter months he passed either abroad or in his
comfortable bachelor flat in St. James’s Street.</p>

<p>This year his choice of a summer residence had
fallen upon Layton Court, with its Jacobean gables,
its lattice windows, and its oak-panelled rooms.
Mr. Stanworth was thoroughly satisfied with
Layton Court. He had been installed there for
rather more than a month, and the little party
now in full swing was the second of the summer’s
series. His sister-in-law, Lady Stanworth, always
acted as hostess for him on these occasions.</p>

<p>Neither Roger nor Alec had had any previous
acquaintance with their host; and their inclusion in
the party had been due to a chain of circumstances.
Mrs. Shannon, an old friend of Lady Stanworth’s,
had been asked in the first place; and with her
Barbara. Then Mr. Stanworth had winked jovially
at his sister-in-law and observed that Barbara was
getting a deuced pretty girl in these days, and
wasn’t there any particular person she would be
glad to see at Layton Court, eh? Lady Stanworth
had given it as her opinion that Barbara might
not be displeased to encounter a certain Mr.
Alexander Grierson about the place; whereupon Mr.
Stanworth, having ascertained in a series of rapid
questions that Mr. Alexander Grierson was a young
man of considerable worldly possessions (which
interested him very much), had played cricket
three years running for Oxford (which interested
him still more), and was apparently a person of
unimpeachable character and morals (which did
not interest him at all), had given certain
injunctions; with the result that two days later Mr.
Alexander Grierson received a charming little
note, to which he had hastened to reply with
gratified alacrity. As to Roger, it had come somehow
to Mr. Stanworth’s ears (as in fact things had a
habit of doing) that he was a close friend of Alec’s;
and there was always room in any house which
happened to be occupied by Mr. Stanworth for a
person of the world-wide reputation and
attainments of Roger Sheringham. A second charming
little note had followed in the wake of the first.</p>

<p>Roger had been delighted with Mr. Stanworth.
He was a man after his own heart, this jolly old
gentleman, with his interesting habit of pressing
half-crown cigars and pre-war whiskey on one at
all hours of the day from ten in the morning
onwards; his red, genial face, always on the point
of bursting into loud, whole-hearted laughter if not
actually doing so; his way of poking sly fun at his
dignified, aristocratic sister-in-law; and the very
faint trace of a remote vulgarity about him that
only seemed, in his particular case, to add a more
intimate, almost a more genuine note to his dealings
with one. Yes, Roger had found old Mr.
Stanworth a character well worth studying. In the
three days since they had first met their
acquaintance had developed rapidly into something that
was very near to friendship.</p>

<p>And there you have Mr. Victor Stanworth, at
present of Layton Court, in the county of
Hertfordshire. A man, you would say (and as Roger
himself was saying in amazed perplexity less than
an hour later), without a single care in the world.</p>

<p>But it is already ten minutes since the breakfast
gong sounded; and if we wish to see for ourselves
what sort of people Mr. Stanworth had collected
round him, it is quite time that we were making
a move towards the dining room.</p>

<p>Alec and Barbara were there already: the former
with a puzzled, hurt expression, that hinted plainly
enough at the inexplicable disaster which had just
overtaken his wooing; the latter so resolutely
natural as to be quite unnatural. Roger, strolling
in just behind them, had noted their silence and
their strained looks, and was prepared to smoothe
over anything in the way of a tiff with a ceaseless
flow of nonsense. Roger was perfectly well aware
of the value of nonsense judiciously applied.</p>

<p>“Morning, Barbara,” he said cheerfully. Roger
made a point of calling all unmarried ladies below
the age of thirty by their Christian names after a
day or two’s acquaintance; it agreed with his
reputation for bohemianism, and it saved trouble.
“Going to be an excellent day, I fancy. Shall I
hack some ham for you, or do you feel like a boiled
egg? You do? It’s a curious feeling, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>Barbara smiled faintly. “Thank you, Mr.
Sheringham,” she said, lifting the cosies off an array
of silver that stood at one end of the table. “Shall
I give you tea or coffee?”</p>

<p>“Coffee, please. Tea with breakfast is like
playing Stravinsky on a mouth organ. It doesn’t go.
Well, what’s the programme to-day? Tennis from
eleven to one; from two to four tennis; between
five and seven a little tennis; and after dinner talk
about tennis. Something like that?”</p>

<p>“Don’t you like tennis, Mr. Sheringham?” asked
Barbara innocently.</p>

<p>“Like it? I love it. One of these days I must
get someone to teach me how to play it. What
are you doing this morning, for instance, Alec?”</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you what I’m not doing,” Alec grinned,
“and that’s playing tennis with you.”</p>

<p>“And why not, you ungrateful blighter, after all
I’ve done for you?” demanded Roger indignantly.</p>

<p>“Because when I play that sort of game I play
cricket,” Alec retorted. “Then you have fielders
all round to stop the balls. It saves an awful lot
of trouble.”</p>

<p>Roger turned to Barbara. “Do you hear that,
Barbara? I appeal to you. My tennis may perhaps
be a little strenuous, but—— Oh, hullo, Major.
We were just thinking about getting up a four for
tennis. Are you game?”</p>

<p>The newcomer, a tall, sallow, taciturn sort of
person, bowed slightly to Barbara. “Good-morning,
Miss Shannon. Tennis, Sheringham? No, I’m
sorry, but I’m much too busy this morning.”</p>

<p>He went to the sideboard, inspected the dishes
gravely, and helped himself to some fish. Scarcely
had he taken his seat with it than the door opened
again and the butler entered.</p>

<p>“Can I speak to you a moment, please, sir?”
asked the latter in a low voice.</p>

<p>The Major glanced up. “Me, Graves?
Certainly.” He rose from his seat and followed the
other out of the room.</p>

<p>“Poor Major Jefferson!” Barbara observed.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Roger with feeling. “I’m glad I
haven’t got his job. Old Stanworth’s an excellent
sort of fellow as a host, but I don’t think I should
care for him as an employer. Eh, Alec?”</p>

<p>“Jefferson seems to have his hands pretty full.
It’s a pity, because he really plays a dashed good
game of tennis. By the way, what would you call
him exactly? A private secretary?”</p>

<p>“Sort of, I suppose,” said Roger. “And
everything else as well. A general dogsbody for the old
man. Rotten job.”</p>

<p>“Isn’t it rather funny to find an army man in a
post like that?” Barbara asked, more for the sake
of something to say than anything; the atmosphere
was still a little strained. “I thought when you
left the army, you had a pension.”</p>

<p>“So you do,” Roger returned. “But pensions
don’t amount to much in any case. Besides, I
rather fancy that Stanworth likes having a man
in the job with a certain social standing attached
to him. Oh, yes; I’ve no doubt that he finds
Jefferson uncommonly useful.”</p>

<p>“Surly sort of devil though, isn’t he?” observed
Alec. “Can I have another cup of coffee, please,
Barbara?”</p>

<p>“Oh, he’s all right,” Roger pronounced. “But
I wouldn’t like to be out with that butler alone on
a dark night.”</p>

<p>“He’s the most extraordinary butler I’ve ever
seen,” said Barbara with decision, manipulating
the coffee-pot. “He positively frightens me at
times. He looks more like a prize-fighter than a
butler. What do you think, Mr. Sheringham?”</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact, you’re perfectly right,
Barbara,” Alec put in. “He is an old boxer.
Jefferson told me. Stanworth took him on for
some reason years ago, and he’s been with him ever
since.”</p>

<p>“I’d like to see a scrap between him and you,
Alec,” Roger murmured bloodthirstily. “There
wouldn’t be much to choose between you.”</p>

<p>“Thanks,” Alec laughed. “Not to-day, I think.
He’d simply wipe the floor with me. He could
give me nearly a stone, I should say.”</p>

<p>“And you’re no chicken. Ah, well, if you ever
think better of it, let me know. I’ll put up a purse
all right.”</p>

<p>“Let’s change the subject,” said Barbara, with
a little shiver. “Oh! Good-morning, Mrs. Plant.
Hullo, Mother, dear! Had a good night?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Shannon, small and fair like her daughter,
was in all other respects as unlike Barbara as could
well be imagined. In place of that young lady’s
characterful little face, Mrs. Shannon’s features
were doll-like and insipid. She was pretty enough,
in a negative, plump sort of way; but interest in her
began and ended with her appearance. Barbara’s
attitude towards her was that of patient
protectiveness. To see the two together one would
think, apart from their ages, that Barbara was the
mother and Mrs. Shannon the daughter.</p>

<p>“A good night?” she repeated peevishly. “My
dear child, how many times must I tell you that
it is quite impossible for me to get any sleep at all
in this wretched place? If it isn’t the birds, it’s
the dogs; and if it isn’t the dogs, it’s——”</p>

<p>“Yes, Mother,” Barbara interrupted soothingly.
“What would you like to eat?”</p>

<p>“Oh, let me,” exclaimed Alec, jumping up.
“And, Mrs. Plant, what are you going to have?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant, a graceful, dark-haired lady of
twenty-six or so, with a husband in the Soudanese
Civil Service, indicated a preference for ham;
Mrs. Shannon consented to be soothed with a fried
sole. Conversation became general.</p>

<p>Major Jefferson looked in once and glanced
round the room in a worried way. “Nobody’s seen
Mr. Stanworth this morning, have they?” he asked
the company in general, and receiving no reply,
went out again.</p>

<p>Barbara and Roger engaged in a fierce discussion
on the relative merits of tennis and golf, for the
latter of which Roger had acquired a half-blue at
Oxford. Mrs. Shannon explained at some length
to Alec over her second sole why she could never
eat much breakfast nowadays. Mary Plant came
to the aid of Barbara in proving that whereas golf
was a game for the elderly and crippled, tennis was
the only possible summer occupation for the young
and energetic. The room buzzed.</p>

<p>The appearance of Lady Stanworth caused the
conversation to stop abruptly. In the ordinary
course of events she breakfasted in her own room.
A tall, stately woman, with hair just beginning to
turn gray, she was never anything but cool and
dignified; but this morning her face seemed even
more serious than usual. For a moment she stood
in the doorway, looking round the room as Major
Jefferson had done a few minutes before.</p>

<p>Then, “Good-morning, everybody,” she said
slowly. “Mr. Sheringham and Mr. Grierson, can
I have a word with you for a moment?”</p>

<p>In deep silence Roger and Alec pushed back their
chairs and rose. It was obvious that something out
of the ordinary had occurred, but nobody quite
liked to ask a question. In any case, Lady
Stanworth’s attitude did not encourage curiosity.
She waited till they had reached the door, and
motioned for them to precede her. When they
had passed through, she shut the door carefully
after her.</p>

<p>“What’s up, Lady Stanworth?” Roger asked
bluntly, as soon as they were alone.</p>

<p>Lady Stanworth bit her lip and hesitated, as if
making up her mind. “Nothing, I hope,” she said,
after a little pause. “But nobody has seen my
brother-in-law this morning and his bed has not
been slept in, while the library door and windows
are locked on the inside. Major Jefferson sent for
me and we have talked it over and decided to break
the door down. He suggested that it would be as
well if you and Mr. Grierson were present also, in
case—in case a witness outside the household
should be required. Will you come with me?”</p>

<p>She led the way in the direction of the library,
and the other two followed.</p>

<p>“You’ve called to him, I suppose?” Alec
remarked.</p>

<p>“Yes. Major Jefferson and Graves have both
called to him, here and outside the library
windows.”</p>

<p>“He’s probably fainted or something in the
library,” said Roger reassuringly, with a good deal
more conviction than he felt. “Or it may be a
stroke. Is his heart at all weak?”</p>

<p>“Not that I’ve ever heard, Mr. Sheringham.”</p>

<p>By the library door Major Jefferson and the
butler were waiting; the former impassive as ever,
the latter clearly ill at ease.</p>

<p>“Ah, here you are,” said the Major. “Sorry
to bother you like this, but you understand. Now,
Grierson, you and Graves and myself are the
biggest; if we put our shoulders to the door together
I think we can force it open. It’s pretty strong,
though. You by the handle, Graves; and you next,
Grierson. That’s right. Now, then,
one—two—three—heave!”</p>

<p>At the third attempt there was the sound of
tearing woodwork, and the heavy door swung on
its hinges. Major Jefferson stepped quickly over
the threshold. The others hung back. In a moment
he was back again, his sallow face the merest trifle
paler.</p>

<p>“What is it?” asked Lady Stanworth anxiously.
“Is Victor there?”</p>

<p>“I don’t think you had better go in for the
moment, Lady Stanworth,” said Major Jefferson
slowly, intercepting her as she stepped forward.
“Mr. Stanworth appears to have shot himself.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch03">

<h2>CHAPTER III. <br/> Mr. Sheringham is Puzzled</h2>

<p>Like many of the other rooms at Layton Court,
the library had been largely modernised. Dark oak
panelling still covered the walls, but the big open
fireplace, with its high chimney-piece, had been
blocked up and a modern grate inserted. The room
was a large one and (assuming that we are standing
just inside the hall with our backs to the front door)
formed the right-hand corner of the back of the
house corresponding with the dining room on the
other side. Between these two was a smaller room,
of the same breadth as the hall, which was used as
a gunroom, storeroom, and general convenience
room. The two rooms on either side of the deep
hall in the front of the house were the drawing
room, on the same side as the library, and the
morning room opposite. A narrow passage between
the morning room and the dining room led to the
servants’ quarters.</p>

<p>In the side of the library which faced the lawn at
the back of the house had been set a pair of wide
French windows, as was also the case in the dining
room; while in the other outer wall, looking over
the rose garden, was a large modern window of the
sash type, with a deep window seat below it set
in the thickness of the wall. The only original
window still remaining was a small lattice one in
the corner on the left of the sash window. The
door that led into the room from the hall was in the
corner diagonal to the lattice window. The
fireplace exactly faced the French windows.</p>

<p>The room was not overcrowded with furniture.
An armchair or two stood by the fireplace; and
there was a small table, bearing a typewriter, by
the wall on the same side as the door. In the angle
between the sash window and the fireplace stood a
deep, black-covered settee. The most important
piece of furniture was a large writing table in the
exact centre of the room facing the sash window.
The walls were lined with bookshelves.</p>

<p>This was the picture that had flashed across
Roger’s retentive brain as he stood in the little
group outside the library door and listened to
Major Jefferson’s curt, almost brutal announcement.
With instinctive curiosity he wondered
where the grim addition to the scene was lying.
The next moment the same instinct had caused him
to turn and scan the face of his hostess.</p>

<p>Lady Stanworth had not screamed or fainted;
she was not that sort of person. Indeed, beyond a
slight and involuntary catching of her breath she
betrayed little or no emotion.</p>

<p>“Shot himself?” she repeated calmly. “Are you
quite sure?”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid there can be no doubt at all,” Major
Jefferson said gravely. “He must have been dead
for some hours.”</p>

<p>“And you think I had better not go in?”</p>

<p>“It’s not a pretty sight,” said the Major shortly.</p>

<p>“Very well. But we had better telephone for a
doctor in any case, I suppose. I will do that.
Victor called in Doctor Matthewson when he had
hay fever a few weeks ago, didn’t he? I’ll send for
him.”</p>

<p>“And the police,” said Jefferson. “They’ll
have to be notified. I’ll do that.”</p>

<p>“I can let them know at the same time,” Lady
Stanworth returned, moving across the hall in the
direction of the telephone.</p>

<p>Roger and Alec exchanged glances.</p>

<p>“I always said that was a wonderful woman,”
whispered the former behind his hand, as they
prepared to follow the Major into the library.</p>

<p>“Is there anything I can do, sir?” asked the
butler from the doorway.</p>

<p>Major Jefferson glanced at him sharply. “Yes;
you come in, too, Graves. It makes another
witness.”</p>

<p>The four men filed in silence into the room. The
curtains were still drawn, and the light was dim.
With an abrupt movement Jefferson strode across
and pulled back the curtains from the French
windows. Then he turned and nodded silently
towards the big writing table.</p>

<p>In the chair behind this, which was turned a
little away from the table, sat, or rather reclined,
the body of Mr. Stanworth. His right hand, which
was dangling by his side almost to the floor, was
tightly clenched about a small revolver, the finger
still convulsively clasping the trigger. In the
centre of his forehead, just at the base of his hair,
was a little circular hole, the edges of which looked
strangely blackened. His head lolled indolently
over the top of the chair-back, and his wide-open
eyes were staring glassily at the ceiling.</p>

<p>It was, as Jefferson had said, not a pretty sight.</p>

<p>Roger was the first to break the silence. “Well,
I’m damned!” he said softly. “What on earth did
he want to go and do that for?”</p>

<p>“Why does anyone do it?” asked Jefferson,
staring at the still figure as if trying to read its
secret. “Because he has some damned good reason
of his own, I suppose.”</p>

<p>Roger shrugged his shoulders a little
impatiently. “No doubt. But old Stanworth of all
people! I shouldn’t have thought that he’d got a
care in the world. Not that I knew him particularly
well, of course; but I was only saying to you
yesterday, Alec——” He broke off suddenly.
Alec’s face had gone a ghastly white, and he was
gazing with horrified eyes at the figure in the chair.</p>

<p>“I was forgetting,” Roger muttered in a low
voice to Jefferson. “The boy was too young to be in
the war; he’s only twenty-four. It’s a bit of a
shock, one’s first corpse. Especially this sort of
thing. Phew! There’s a smell of death in here.
Let’s get some of these windows open.”</p>

<p>He turned and threw open the French windows,
letting a draught of warm air into the room.
“Locked on the inside all right,” he commented
as he did so. “So are the other two. Here, Alec,
come outside for a minute. It’s no wonder you’re
feeling a bit turned up.”</p>

<p>Alec smiled faintly; he had managed to pull
himself together and the colour was returning to
his cheeks. “Oh, I’m all right,” he said, a little
shakily. “It was just a bit of a shock at first.”</p>

<p>The breeze had fluttered the papers on the
writing table and one fell to the ground. Graves, the
butler, stepped forward to pick it up. Before
replacing it he glanced idly at something that was
written on it.</p>

<p>“Sir!” he exclaimed excitedly. “Look at this!”</p>

<p>He handed the paper to Major Jefferson, who
read it eagerly.</p>

<p>“Anything of interest?” Roger asked curiously.</p>

<p>“Very much so,” Jefferson replied dryly. “It’s
a statement. I’ll read it to you. ‘To Whom it May
Concern. For reasons that concern only myself, I
have decided to kill myself.’ And his signature
at the bottom.” He twisted the piece of paper
thoughtfully in his hand. “But I wish he’d said
what his reasons were,” he added in puzzled tones.</p>

<p>“Yes, it’s a remarkably reticent document,”
Roger agreed. “But it’s plain enough, isn’t it?
May I have a look at it?”</p>

<p>He took it from the other’s outstretched hand
and examined it with interest. The paper was
slightly creased, and the message itself was
typewritten. The signature, Victor Stanworth, was
bold and firm; but just above it was another
attempt, which had only got as far as V-i-c and
looked as if it had been written with a pen
insufficiently supplied with ink.</p>

<p>“He must have gone about the business with
extraordinary deliberation,” Roger commented.
“He goes to the trouble of typing this instead of
writing it; and when he finds he hadn’t dipped his
pen deep enough in the ink-pot, calmly signs it
again. And just look at that signature! Not a trace
of nerves in it, is there?”</p>

<p>He handed the paper back, and the Major looked
at it again.</p>

<p>“Stanworth was never much troubled with
nerves,” he remarked shortly. “And the signature’s
genuine enough. I’d take my oath on that.”</p>

<p>Alec could not help feeling that Jefferson’s words
had supplied an answer to a question which Roger
had purposely refrained from asking.</p>

<p>“Well, I don’t know much about this sort of
thing,” Roger observed, “but I suppose one
thing’s certain. The body mustn’t be touched
before the police come.”</p>

<p>“Even in the case of a suicide?” Jefferson asked
doubtfully.</p>

<p>“In any case, surely.”</p>

<p>“I shouldn’t have thought it would have
mattered in this case,” said Jefferson, a little
reluctantly. “Still, perhaps you’re right. Not that it
matters either way,” he added quickly.</p>

<p>There was a tap on the half-open door.</p>

<p>“I’ve telephoned to Doctor Matthewson and
the police,” came Lady Stanworth’s even tones.
“They’re sending an inspector over from Elchester
at once. And now don’t you think we ought to tell
the others in the dining room?”</p>

<p>“I think so certainly,” said Roger, who
happened to be nearest to the door. “There’s no sense
in delaying it. Besides, if we tell them now it will
give them time to get over it a little before the
police come.”</p>

<p>“Quite so,” said Jefferson. “And the servants
as well. Graves, you’d better go and break the
news in the kitchen. Be as tactful as you can.”</p>

<p>“Very good, sir.”</p>

<p>With a last, but quite expressionless glance at
his late master, the burly figure turned and walked
slowly out of the room.</p>

<p>“I’ve seen people more cut up at the death of a
man they’ve lived with for twenty years than <em>that</em>
gentleman,” Roger murmured in Alec’s ear, raising
his eyebrows significantly.</p>

<p>“And I wish you would be good enough to break
the news in the dining room, Major Jefferson,”
Lady Stanworth remarked. “I really hardly feel
up to it myself.”</p>

<p>“Of course,” said Jefferson quickly. “In fact,
I think it would be much better if you went up
to your room and rested a little before the police
get here, Lady Stanworth. This is bound to be a
very great strain. I will tell one of the maids to
take you up a cup of tea.”</p>

<p>Lady Stanworth looked a trifle surprised, and
for a moment it seemed that she was going to
object to this course. Evidently, however, she
changed her mind if that was the case; for she
only said quietly, “Thank you. Yes, I think that
would be best. Please let me know directly the
police arrive.”</p>

<p>She made her way, a little wearily, up the broad
staircase and disappeared from view.</p>

<p>Jefferson turned to Roger. “I think as a matter
of fact that I should prefer you to tell the ladies,
if you would, Sheringham. You’d do it much better
than I. I’m not much use at putting unpleasant
things in a pleasant way.”</p>

<p>“Certainly I will, if you’d rather. Alec, you’d
better stay here with the Major.”</p>

<p>Jefferson hesitated. “As a matter of fact,
Grierson, I was wondering if you would be good
enough to run across to the stables and tell
Chapman to have the car ready all day to-day, as it
might be wanted any time at a moment’s notice.
Will you?”</p>

<p>“Of course,” said Alec promptly and hurried
off, only too glad of the opportunity for a little
action. He had not yet quite got over that first
sight of the dead man in the streaming sunshine.</p>

<p>Roger walked slowly across to the dining-room
door; but he was not pondering over what he was
going to say. He was repeating to himself over and
over again, “Why was Jefferson so infernally
anxious to get rid of the four of us in such a hurry?
Why? Why? Why?”</p>

<p>With his hand on the very knob of the door a
possible answer came to him, in the form of another
question.</p>

<p>“Why was Jefferson so reluctant to admit that
the body must not be touched before the arrival
of the police?”</p>

<p>It was a somewhat distrait Roger who opened
the dining-room door, and proceeded to acquaint
three astounded ladies with the somewhat
surprising fact that their host had just shot himself
through the head.</p>

<p>Their reception of his news did not speak very
well for Roger’s tactfulness. It may have been
that his preoccupation with what was in his mind
prevented him from doing justice to himself; but
the fact remains that even he was considerably
startled by the way in which his hearers behaved,
and it took a good deal to startle Roger.</p>

<p>Mrs. Shannon, it is true, merely remarked with
a not unjustified annoyance that it was really
exceedingly awkward as she had made all her
arrangements for being here another ten days and
now she supposed they would have to leave at once,
and where on earth did anyone think they could go
to with the house in town shut up and all the
servants away? Barbara rose slowly to her feet,
with every trace of colour drained out of her face,
swayed a little and, sitting down abruptly, stared
with unseeing eyes out into the sunlit garden.
Mrs. Plant incontinently and silently fainted.</p>

<p>But Roger had other things to do than dancing
attendance upon fainting and hysterical ladies.
Leaving Mrs. Plant somewhat unceremoniously
to the ministrations of Barbara and her mother,
he hurried back to the library, taking care to step
lightly. The sight that met his eyes was exactly
what he had expected.</p>

<p>Major Jefferson was bending over the dead man,
rapidly and methodically searching his pockets.</p>

<p>“Hullo,” Roger remarked easily from the
doorway. “Putting him straight a bit?”</p>

<p>The Major started violently. Then he bit his
lip and slowly straightened his back.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he said slowly, after the least possible
pause. “Yes. I can’t bear to see this constrained
attitude he’s in.”</p>

<p>“It’s beastly,” Roger said sympathetically,
advancing unconcernedly into the room and
shutting the door behind him. “I know. But I shouldn’t
move him if I were you. Not till the police have
seen him, at any rate. They’re rather particular
about that sort of thing, I believe.”</p>

<p>Jefferson shrugged his shoulders, frowning. “It
seems damned nonsense to me,” he said bluntly.</p>

<p>“Look here,” Roger remarked suddenly, “you
mustn’t let this thing get on your nerves, you know.
Come and take a turn in the garden with me.”</p>

<p>He linked his arm through the other’s and,
observing his obvious hesitation, drew him towards
the open windows. “Do you all the good in the
world,” he persisted.</p>

<p>Jefferson allowed himself to be persuaded.</p>

<p>For some minutes the two strolled up and down
the lawn, and Roger took some care to keep the
conversation on indifferent topics. But in spite of
all his efforts, Jefferson kept looking at his watch,
and it was clear that he was counting the minutes
before the police might be expected. What Roger,
watch how he might, was unable to discover was
whether his companion was eager for their arrival
or the reverse. The only thing he knew for certain
was that this imperturbable man was, for some
reason or other, very badly rattled. It might be
the simple fact of his employer’s unseemly end
which had caused this unwonted state of affairs,
Roger thought; for certainly Jefferson and old
Stanworth had been a very long time together.
On the other hand, it might not. And if this was
not the reason, what was?</p>

<p>When they had made the circuit of the rose
garden three times, Jefferson halted suddenly.</p>

<p>“The police should be here at any minute now,”
he said abruptly. “I’m going to walk down towards
the lodge to meet them. I’ll call you when we want
you.”</p>

<p>Anything more obvious in the way of a congé
could hardly be imagined. Roger accepted it with
the best grace he could.</p>

<p>“Very well,” he nodded. “I’ll be somewhere out
here.”</p>

<p>Jefferson disappeared rapidly down the drive and
Roger was left to continue his walk alone. But he
had no intention of being bored. There was, he
felt, quite a lot of thinking that he would rather
like to do; and the chance of a few minutes’
solitude was not unwelcome. He paced slowly back
to the lawn again, his pipe in full blast, and
reeking clouds trailing lazily behind him.</p>

<p>But Roger was not to do his thinking just yet.
Scarcely had he reached the lawn when Alec
appeared from the direction of the stables, somewhat
hot and flushed. He fell into step with Roger and
began to explain why he had been so long.</p>

<p>“Couldn’t get away from the wretched fellow!”
he exclaimed. “Had to tell him the whole thing
from beginning to—— Hullo! What’s up?”</p>

<p>Roger had halted and was staring in through the
library windows. “I’ll swear I left that door shut,”
he said in puzzled tones. “Somebody’s opened it.
Come on!”</p>

<p>“Where are you going?” Alec asked in surprise.</p>

<p>“To see who’s in the library,” returned Roger,
already halfway across the lawn. He quickened
his pace to a run and hurried in through the French
windows, Alec close on his heels.</p>

<p>A woman who was bending over something on
the farther side of the room straightened hastily
at their approach. It was Mrs. Plant, and the
object over which she had been bending was a large
safe that stood by the wall close to the little
typewriting table. Roger had just had time to see that
she was feverishly twisting the knob before she had
sprung up on hearing their footsteps.</p>

<p>She faced them with heaving bosom and
horrified eyes, one hand clutching the folds of her frock,
the other clenched at her side. It was obvious that
she was frightened almost out of her wits.</p>

<p>“Were you looking for anything?” Roger asked
politely, and cursed himself for the banality of
the words even as he spoke them.</p>

<p>With a tremendous effort Mrs. Plant appeared
to pull herself together.</p>

<p>“My jewels,” she muttered jerkily. “I asked—Mr.
Stanworth to—to lock them in his safe the
other day. I—I was wondering—would the police
take them? I thought it might be better if I——”</p>

<p>“That’s all right, Mrs. Plant,” said Roger
soothingly, breaking in upon her painful utterances.
“The police wouldn’t take them in any case, I
expect; and you can easily identify what is yours.
They’ll be safe enough, I assure you.”</p>

<p>A little colour was coming slowly back into her
cheeks and her breathing was becoming less rapid.</p>

<p>“Thank you so much, Mr. Sheringham,” she
said more easily. “It was absurd of me, no doubt,
but they’re rather valuable, and I had a sudden
panic about them. Of course I ought not to have
tried to take them myself. I can’t think what I
can have been doing!” She laughed nervously.
“Really, I’m positively ashamed of myself. You
won’t give me away for being so foolish, will you?”</p>

<p>There was a note of urgent appeal in the last
sentence that belied the lightness of the words.</p>

<p>Roger smiled reassuringly. “Of course not,” he
said promptly. “Wouldn’t dream of it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, thank you so much. I know I can rely on
you. And on Mr. Grierson, too. Well, I suppose
I’d better run away before anyone else catches
me here.”</p>

<p>She made her way out of the room, carefully
averting her eyes from the chair by the writing
table.</p>

<p>Roger turned to Alec and whistled softly.</p>

<p>“Now what did she want to lie like that for?”
he asked with raised eyebrows.</p>

<p>“Do you think she was lying?” Alec asked in
puzzled tones. “I should have said that Mrs. Plant
was as straight as they make ’em.”</p>

<p>Roger shrugged his shoulders in mock despair.
“And so should I! That’s what makes it all the
more extraordinary. Yet of course she was lying.
Like a trooper! And so ridiculously! Her story’s
bound to be disproved as soon as the safe is opened.
She must have said the first thing that came into
her head. Alec, my son, there’s something damned
queer going on here! Mrs. Plant isn’t the only one
who’s lying. Come out into the garden and listen
to the duplicity of Jefferson.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch04">

<h2>CHAPTER IV. <br/> Major Jefferson is Reluctant</h2>

<p>Inspector Mansfield, of the Elchester police,
was a methodical person. He knew exactly what
he had to do, and just how to do it. And he had
precisely as much imagination as was required for
his job, and not a fraction more. Too much
imagination can be a very severe handicap to a
conscientious policeman, in spite of what the
detective stories may say.</p>

<p>As the inspector entered the library with
Jefferson from the hall, Roger, who had heard his
arrival and was determined to miss no more of this
interesting situation than he could possibly help,
contrived to present himself at the French
windows, the faithful Alec still in tow.</p>

<p>“Good-morning, Inspector,” he said cheerfully.</p>

<p>Jefferson frowned slightly; perhaps he was
remembering his last words to Roger. “These are
Mr. Sheringham and Mr. Grierson, Inspector,”
he said a little brusquely. “They were present
when we broke the door in.”</p>

<p>The inspector nodded. “Good-morning, gentlemen.
Sad business, this. Very.” He glanced rapidly
round the room. “Ah, there’s the body. Excuse me,
Major.”</p>

<p>He stepped quickly across and bent over the
figure in the chair, examining it attentively. Then
he dropped on his knees and scrutinised the hand
that held the revolver.</p>

<p>“Mustn’t touch anything till the doctor’s seen
him,” he explained briefly, rising to his feet again
and dusting the knees of his trousers. “May I
have a look at that document you spoke of, sir?”</p>

<p>“Certainly, Inspector. It’s on the table.”</p>

<p>Jefferson showed where the paper was lying, and
the inspector picked it up. Roger edged farther into
the room. The presence of himself and Alec had
not been challenged, and he wished to establish
his right to be there. Furthermore, he was
uncommonly curious to hear the inspector’s views on the
somewhat remarkable document he was now
studying.</p>

<p>The inspector looked up. “H’m!” he observed
noncommittally, laying the paper on the table
again. “To the point, at any rate. Was Mr.
Stanworth in the habit of using a typewriter
instead of pen and ink?”</p>

<p>“Just the point I mentioned, Inspector,” Roger
broke in.</p>

<p>“Indeed, sir?” said the inspector politely. He
turned to Jefferson. “Do you happen to know,
Major Jefferson?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I think he was,” Jefferson said thoughtfully.
“He certainly always wrote his letters on it.
I fancy he used it a good deal.”</p>

<p>“But to sit down and type a thing like that!”
Roger exclaimed. “It seems so unnecessary
somehow.”</p>

<p>“And what do you make of it then, Mr. Sheringham?”
the inspector asked with tolerant interest.</p>

<p>“I should say it showed a cold-blooded deliberation
that proves Mr. Stanworth to have been a
very exceptional man,” Roger replied quickly.</p>

<p>The inspector smiled faintly. “I see you’re more
used to considering characters than actions,” he
said. “Now I should have said that a more
ordinary explanation might be that Mr. Stanworth,
having already something else to type on the
machine, slipped in a piece of paper and did that
at the same time.”</p>

<p>“Oh!” Roger remarked, somewhat nonplussed.
“Yes, I never thought of that.”</p>

<p>“It’s extraordinary what simple things one
doesn’t think of at times,” said the inspector
wisely.</p>

<p>“But in that case,” Roger observed thoughtfully,
“wouldn’t you expect to find the other thing
he had been typing? It can hardly have left the
room, can it?”</p>

<p>“That’s impossible to say,” said the inspector,
with the air of one closing the subject. “We don’t
in the least know what Mr. Stanworth did last
night. He might have gone out and posted a letter
or two before he shot himself; and unless anyone
happened to see him we could never know whether
he did or not. Now I take it, sir,” he added,
turning to Major Jefferson, “that Mr. Stanworth was
a rather brusque, decisive sort of man?”</p>

<p>Jefferson considered. “Decisive, certainly. But
I don’t know whether you would call him brusque
exactly. Why?”</p>

<p>“The wording of this statement. It’s a bit—well,
out of the ordinary, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>“It’s quite typical,” said Jefferson shortly.</p>

<p>“It is? That’s what I’m getting at. Now have
you any idea at all as to the reasons he hints at?”</p>

<p>“Not in the least. I’m absolutely in the dark.”</p>

<p>“Ah! Well, perhaps Lady Stanworth will be
able to throw some light on that point later.” He
strolled over to the door and began to examine the
lock.</p>

<p>Roger drew Alec aside. “You know, this is
jolly interesting, this business,” he murmured.
“I’ve never seen the police at work before. But
the story books are all wrong. This man isn’t a
fool by any means; very far from it. He caught
me out properly over that typing; and twice at
that. Perfectly obvious points when they’re
mentioned, of course; and I can’t think why they didn’t
occur to me. That’s the trouble with an <i lang="fr">idée fixe</i>;
you can’t see beyond it, or even round it. Hullo;
he’s trying the windows now.”</p>

<p>The inspector had crossed the room and was
testing the fastenings of the French windows.
“You said all these were fastened when you got in
as well as the door, sir?” he remarked to Jefferson.</p>

<p>“Yes. But Mr. Sheringham can answer for that
better than I. He opened them.”</p>

<p>The inspector flashed a quick glance at Roger.
“And they were all securely fastened?”</p>

<p>“Absolutely,” said Roger with conviction. “I
remember commenting on it at the time.”</p>

<p>“Why did you open them, sir?”</p>

<p>“To let some air into the place. It smelt of death,
if you know what I mean.”</p>

<p>The inspector nodded as if the explanation
satisfied him, and at the same moment the front
door bell rang.</p>

<p>“I expect that’s the doctor,” Jefferson remarked,
moving towards the door. “I’ll go and see.”</p>

<p>“That man’s badly on the jump,” Roger
commented to himself. Aloud he took the opportunity
of remarking, “I dare say you’ll find some private
papers in that safe which may throw some light
on the business.” Roger badly wanted to know
what was inside that safe. And what wasn’t!</p>

<p>“Safe, sir?” said the inspector sharply. “What
safe?”</p>

<p>Roger pointed out where the safe stood. “I
understand that Mr. Stanworth always carried
it about with him,” he remarked casually. “That
seems to point to the fact of there being
something helpful inside, I should say.”</p>

<p>The inspector glanced round. “You never
know with these suicides, sir,” he said in
confidential tones. “Sometimes the reason’s plain
enough; but often there doesn’t seem any reason
for it at all. Either they’ve kept it to themselves, or
else they’ve gone suddenly dotty. ‘Temporary
Insanity’ is more often true than you’d say.
Melancholia and such-like. The doctor may be able to
help us there.”</p>

<p>“And here he comes, if I’m not very much
mistaken,” Roger observed, as the sound of
approaching voices reached their ears.</p>

<p>The next moment Jefferson reappeared, showing
a tall, thin man with a small bag in his hand into
the room.</p>

<p>“This is Doctor Matthewson,” he said.</p>

<p>The doctor and the inspector exchanged nods of
acquaintance. “There’s the body, Doctor,”
remarked the latter, waving his hand towards the
chair. “Nothing very remarkable about the case;
but of course you know the coroner will want a
detailed report.”</p>

<p>Dr. Matthewson nodded again and, setting his
bag upon the table, bent over the still figure in the
chair and proceeded to make his examination.</p>

<p>It did not take him many minutes.</p>

<p>“Been dead about eight hours,” he remarked
briefly to the inspector, as he straightened up
again. “Let’s see. It’s just past ten now, isn’t it?
I should say he died at somewhere round two
o’clock this morning. The revolver must have been
within a couple of inches of his forehead when he
fired. The bullet may be——” He felt carefully
at the back of the dead man’s head, and, whipping
a lancet out of his pocket, made an incision in the
skull. “Here it is,” he added, extracting a small
object of shining metal from the skin. “Lodged
just under the scalp.”</p>

<p>The inspector made a few brief notes in his
pocketbook.</p>

<p>“Obviously self-inflicted, of course?” he
observed.</p>

<p>The doctor raised the dangling hand and
scrutinised the fingers that held the revolver.
“Obviously. The grip is properly adjusted and
must have been applied during life.” With an
effort he loosened the clasp of the dead fingers and
handed the weapon across the table to the
inspector.</p>

<p>The latter twirled the chamber thoughtfully
before opening it. “Not fully loaded, but only
one chamber fired,” he announced, and made
another note.</p>

<p>“Edges of wound blackened and traces of
powder on surrounding skin,” supplied the doctor.</p>

<p>The inspector extracted the empty shell and
fitted the bullet carefully into it, comparing the
latter with the bullets of the unfired cartridges.</p>

<p>“Why do you do that?” Roger asked with
interest. “You know the bullet must have been
fired from that revolver.”</p>

<p>“It’s not my job to <em>know</em> anything, sir,”
returned the inspector, a little huffily. “My job is to
collect evidence.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I wasn’t meaning that you weren’t acting
perfectly correctly,” Roger said hastily. “But
I’ve never seen anything of this sort before, and I
was wondering why you were taking such pains to
collect evidence when the cause of death is so
obvious.”</p>

<p>“Well, sir, it isn’t my business to determine the
cause of death,” the inspector explained, unbending
slightly before the other’s obvious interest.
“That’s the coroner’s job. All I have to do is to
assemble all the available evidence that I can find,
however trivial it may seem. Then I lay it before
him, and he directs the jury accordingly. That is
the correct procedure.”</p>

<p>Roger retired into the background. “I said there
weren’t any flies on this bird,” he muttered to
Alec, who had been a silent but none the less
interested spectator of the proceedings. “That’s the
third time he’s wiped the floor with me.”</p>

<p>“By the way, sir,” the inspector was saying to
Doctor Matthewson, “I take it that as Lady
Stanworth sent for you, you have been called in here
before since they arrived?”</p>

<p>“That’s right, Inspector,” nodded the doctor.
“Mr. Stanworth called me in himself. He had a
slight attack of hay fever.”</p>

<p>“Ah!” remarked the inspector with interest.
“And I suppose you examined him more or less.”</p>

<p>The doctor smiled faintly. He was remembering
a somewhat strenuous half hour he had spent with
his patient in this very room. “As a matter of
fact, I examined him very thoroughly indeed. At
his own request, of course. He said that it was the
first time he had seen a doctor for fifteen years,
and he’d like to be properly overhauled while he
was about it.”</p>

<p>“And how did you find him?” the inspector
asked with interest. “Anything much wrong with
him? Heart, or anything like that?”</p>

<p>“See what he’s getting at?” Roger whispered to
Alec. “Wants to find out if he was suffering from
any incurable disease that might have led to
suicide.”</p>

<p>“There was nothing wrong with him at all,”
the doctor said with finality. “He was as sound
as the proverbial bell. In fact, for a man of his
years he was in a really remarkably healthy
condition.”</p>

<p>“Oh!” The inspector was clearly a little
disappointed. “Well, what about this safe, then?”</p>

<p>“The safe?” Major Jefferson repeated in startled
tones.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir; I think I should like to have a look at
the contents, if you please. They may throw some
light on the affair.”</p>

<p>“But—but——” Major Jefferson hesitated,
and it seemed to the interested Roger that his
usually impassive face showed traces of real alarm.
“But is that necessary?” he asked more calmly.
“There may be private papers in there of a highly
confidential nature. Not that I know anything
about it,” he added somewhat hastily; “but Mr.
Stanworth was always exceedingly reticent about
the contents.”</p>

<p>“All the more reason for us to have a look at
them, sir,” returned the inspector dryly. “As
for anything confidential, that will of course go no
farther. That is, unless there is some excellent
reason to the contrary,” he added darkly.</p>

<p>Still Jefferson hesitated. “Of course, if you
insist,” he said slowly, “there is no more to be said.
Still, it seems highly unnecessary to me, I must
say.”</p>

<p>“That, sir, is a matter for me to decide,” replied
the inspector shortly. “Now, can you tell me where
the key would be and what the combination is?”</p>

<p>“I believe that Mr. Stanworth usually kept his
key-ring in his right-hand waistcoat pocket,”
Jefferson said tonelessly, as if the subject had
ceased to interest him. “As for the combination, I
have not the least idea what it was. I was not in
Mr. Stanworth’s confidence to that extent,” he
added with the least possible shade of bitterness
in his voice.</p>

<p>The inspector was feeling in the pocket
mentioned. “Well, they’re not here now,” he said.
With quick, deft movements he searched the other
pockets. “Ah! Here they are. In the one above.
He must have slipped them into the wrong pocket
by mistake. But you say you don’t know the
combination? Now I wonder how we can find
that.” He weighed the ring of keys thoughtfully
in his hand, deliberating.</p>

<p>Roger had strolled round the room with a
careless air. If that safe was going to be opened, he
wanted a good look at the contents. Now he paused
by the fireplace.</p>

<p>“Hullo!” he remarked suddenly. “Somebody’s
been burning something here.” He bent and peered
into the grate. “Paper! I shouldn’t be surprised if
those ashes aren’t all that’s left of your evidence,
Inspector.”</p>

<p>The inspector crossed the room hastily and
joined him. “I daresay you’re right, Mr. Sheringham,”
he said disappointedly. “I ought to have
noticed that myself. Thank you. Still, we must get
that safe opened as soon as possible in any case.”</p>

<p>Roger rejoined Alec. “One to me,” he smiled.
“Now, if he’d been one of the story-book inspectors,
he’d have bitten my head off for discovering
something that he’d missed. I like this man.”</p>

<p>The inspector put his notebook away. “Well,
Doctor,” he said briskly, “I don’t think there’s
anything more that you or I can do here, is there?”</p>

<p>“There’s nothing more that I can do,” Doctor
Matthewson replied. “I’d like to get away, too,
if you can spare me. I’m rather busy to-day. I’ll
let you have that report at once.”</p>

<p>“Thanks. No, I shan’t want you any more, sir.
I’ll let you know when the inquest will be.
Probably to-morrow.” He turned to Jefferson. “And
now, sir, if you’ll let me use the telephone, I’ll ring
up the coroner and notify him. And after that, if
there’s another room convenient, I’d like to
interview these gentlemen and yourself, and the other
members of the household also. We may be able
to get a little closer to those reasons that Mr.
Stanworth mentions.” He folded up the document
in question and tucked it carefully away in his
pocket.</p>

<p>“Then you won’t be wanting this room any
more?” asked Jefferson.</p>

<p>“Not for the present. But I’ll send in the
constable I brought with me to take charge in the
meantime.”</p>

<p>“Oh!”</p>

<p>Roger looked curiously at the last speaker. Then
he turned to Alec.</p>

<p>“Now am I getting a bee in my bonnet,” he
said in a low voice, as they followed the others out
of the room, “or did Jefferson sound disappointed
to you just then?”</p>

<p>“Heaven only knows,” Alec whispered back.
“I can’t make out any of them, and you’re as bad
as anybody else!”</p>

<p>“Wait till I get you alone. I’m going to talk my
head off,” Roger promised.</p>

<p>The inspector was giving his instructions to a
large burly countryman, disguised as a policeman,
who had been waiting patiently in the hall all this
time. While Jefferson led the way to the morning
room, the latter ambled portentously into the
library. It was the first time he had been placed in
charge, however temporary, of a case of this
importance, and he respected himself tremendously
for it.</p>

<p>Arrived on the scene of the tragedy, he frowned
heavily about him, gazed severely at the body for a
moment and then very solemnly smelled at the
ink-pot. He had once read a lurid story in which
what had been thought at first to be a case of
suicide had turned out eventually to be a murder
carried out by means of a poisoned ink-pot; and
he was taking no chances.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch05">

<h2>CHAPTER V. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Asks a Question</h2>

<p>“Now, gentlemen,” said the inspector, when the
four of them were seated in the morning room,
“there is a certain amount of routine work for me
to do, though it may strike you as unimportant.”
He smiled slightly towards Roger.</p>

<p>“Not a bit,” said that gentleman quickly. “I’m
extraordinarily interested in all this. You’ve no
idea how useful it will be if I ever want to write a
detective novel.”</p>

<p>“Well, the chief thing I want to know,” the
inspector resumed, “is who was the last person to
see the deceased alive. Now when did you see him
last, Major Jefferson?”</p>

<p>“About an hour and a half after dinner. Say
ten o’clock. He was smoking in the garden with
Mr. Sheringham, and I wanted to ask him
something about the arrangements for to-day.”</p>

<p>“That’s right,” Roger nodded. “I remember.
It was a few minutes past ten. The church clock
in the village had just struck.”</p>

<p>“And what did you want to ask him?”</p>

<p>“Oh, nothing very important. Only what time
he wanted the car in the morning, if at all. But
I usually made a point of seeing him about that
time every evening, in case he had any instructions
to give me for the following day.”</p>

<p>“I see. And what did he tell you?”</p>

<p>“That he wouldn’t be wanting the car this
morning at all.”</p>

<p>“And did he seem quite normal? Not agitated
or upset in any way? Perfectly ordinary?”</p>

<p>“Perfectly.”</p>

<p>“And had been all day? At dinner, for instance?”</p>

<p>“Certainly. He was in a very good temper at
dinner, as a matter of fact.”</p>

<p>“What do you mean by that?” asked the
inspector quickly. “Wasn’t he usually in a good
temper?”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes. Usually. But like most strong-minded,
self-willed men he could be thoroughly unpleasant
if he chose.”</p>

<p>“Now in the course of your duties as his secretary,
has it come to your notice whether he has had
any bad news lately? Either financial or
otherwise?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“Would you have known if he had?”</p>

<p>“I doubt it. If it had been financial, he might
have told me, as I frequently had to write letters
for him regarding his investments and so forth.
But otherwise I am quite sure he would not. Mr.
Stanworth was very reticent indeed about his
personal affairs.”</p>

<p>“I see. He was comfortably off, wasn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Very. You might call it more than that.”</p>

<p>“Rich, in fact. And how were his investments
laid out? Did he, for instance, put most of his
money into one concern?”</p>

<p>“You mean, was he in a position to be ruined by
the failure of any single business? No, I’m sure he
wasn’t. His money was spread over a large number
of investments; and to my certain knowledge he
still has a very large sum indeed in Government
stock.”</p>

<p>“Then we can take it as fairly sure that,
whatever caused him to take his life, it was nothing to
do with money matters?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I’m quite convinced of that.”</p>

<p>“Then we must look elsewhere. Now, had Mr.
Stanworth any relations besides his sister-in-law?”</p>

<p>“Not to my knowledge, and I’ve been with him
six years. He had a younger brother, of course,
Lady Stanworth’s husband; but I’ve never heard
of any others.”</p>

<p>“I see. Well, Major Jefferson, am I to take it
that you can’t throw any light at all on the reasons
for Mr. Stanworth’s suicide? Think carefully, if
you please. Suicide is a pretty serious step, and the
reasons must be correspondingly serious. The
coroner is bound to do his best to bring them to light.”</p>

<p>“I haven’t the least idea,” said Jefferson quietly.
“It is the last thing in the world I should have
expected from Mr. Stanworth.”</p>

<p>The inspector turned to Roger. “Now, sir, you
were in the garden with him last evening at ten.
What happened after that?”</p>

<p>“Oh, we didn’t stay out very long after that.
Not more than twenty minutes, I should say. I
had some work to do, and we went in together.”</p>

<p>“What were you talking about in the garden?”</p>

<p>“Roses chiefly. He was very keen on roses and
took a lot of interest in the rose garden here.”</p>

<p>“Did he seem cheerful?”</p>

<p>“Very. He always struck me as an exceptionally
cheerful person. Genial, in fact.”</p>

<p>“Did anything he said lead you to think that he
might be contemplating taking his life? Not at
the time, of course; but looking back on it. No
casual remark, or anything like that?”</p>

<p>“Good heavens, no! On the contrary, he talked
quite a lot about the future. What part of the
country he was going to stay in next year, and that
sort of thing.”</p>

<p>“I see. Well, what happened when you went in?”</p>

<p>“We met Mrs. Plant in the hall, and he stopped
to speak to her. I went on to the drawing room
to get a book I’d left there. When I came back
they were still in the hall talking. I said good-night
to both of them and went on up to my room.
That was the last I saw of him.”</p>

<p>“Thank you. Then you can’t help, either?”</p>

<p>“Not in the least, I’m afraid. The whole thing
beats me completely.”</p>

<p>The inspector looked at Alec. “And you, sir?
When did you see him last?”</p>

<p>Alec considered. “I hardly saw him after dinner
at all, Inspector. That is, I didn’t speak to him;
but I caught a glimpse of him once or twice in the
garden with Mr. Sheringham.”</p>

<p>“You were in the garden, too?”</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>“What were you doing?”</p>

<p>Alec blushed. “Well, I was——That is——”</p>

<p>Roger came to his rescue. “Mr. Grierson and
Miss Shannon, whom you have not yet had the
pleasure of meeting, became engaged yesterday,
Inspector,” he said gravely, but with a side-long
wink.</p>

<p>The inspector smiled genially. “Then I don’t
think we need enquire what Mr. Grierson was
doing in the garden last night,” he remarked
jovially. “Or Miss Shannon, for that matter, when I
come to question her later. And you can’t help us
either in any other direction?”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid not, Inspector. I really knew very
little of Mr. Stanworth in any case. I only met
him for the first time when I arrived here three
days ago.”</p>

<p>Inspector Mansfield rose to his feet. “Well, I
think that is all I have to ask you, gentlemen.
After all, even if we can’t find out what his reasons
were, the case is clear enough. The door and all
the windows locked on the inside; the revolver in
his hand, which the doctor says must have been
there during life; to say nothing of his own
statement. I don’t think the coroner will take very long
to arrive at his verdict.”</p>

<p>“What about the inquest?” Roger asked. “Shall
we be wanted?”</p>

<p>“You and Mr. Grierson will be, and the other
person who was present when the door was broken
in—the butler, wasn’t it? And of course yourself,
Major, and Lady Stanworth; and the last person to
see him alive. Who else is there in the party?
Mrs. and Miss Shannon and Mrs. Plant? Well, I
don’t think they will be required, unless they have
any further information of importance. Still, the
coroner will notify whom he wants to attend.”</p>

<p>“And the inquest will be to-morrow?” Major
Jefferson asked.</p>

<p>“Probably. In a case as simple as this there is
no point in delay. And now, Major, I wonder if I
might have a word with Lady Stanworth down
here. And I wish you’d look round and see if you
can hit on the code for that safe. I could get it
from the makers, of course, if necessary; but I
don’t want to have to do that unless I must.”</p>

<p>Major Jefferson nodded. “I’ll try,” he said
briefly. “And I’ll send one of the maids to tell
Lady Stanworth. She’s in her room.”</p>

<p>He rang the bell, and Roger and Alec strolled
over to the door.</p>

<p>“And you might warn the others in the
household not to leave the premises till I have seen
them,” they heard the inspector say as they passed
through it. “I shall have to interrogate everyone,
of course.”</p>

<p>Roger drew Alec into the dining room and
thence out into the garden. They reached the
middle of the lawn before he spoke.</p>

<p>“Alec,” he said seriously, “what do you make of
it all?”</p>

<p>“Make of what?” asked Alec.</p>

<p>“Make of what?” Roger repeated scornfully.
“Why, the whole blessed business, of course.
Alec, you’re uncommonly slow in the up-take.
Can’t you see that Jefferson is hiding something
for all he’s worth?”</p>

<p>“He did seem a bit reticent, certainly,” Alec
agreed cautiously.</p>

<p>“Reticent? Why, if that fellow’s telling one
tenth of what he knows I should be surprised.
And what about Mrs. Plant? And why doesn’t
anybody know the combination of that safe? I tell
you, there are wheels within wheels going on here.”</p>

<p>Alec threw caution to the winds. “It <em>is</em> curious,”
he admitted recklessly.</p>

<p>Roger was intent on his own thoughts. “And
why was Jefferson searching Mr. Stanworth’s
pockets?” he demanded suddenly. “Oh, but of
course, that’s obvious enough.”</p>

<p>“I’m dashed if it is. Why was he?”</p>

<p>“To find the keys of the safe, I suppose. What
else could it be? For some reason or other Jefferson
is all against having that safe opened. By the
police, at any rate. And so is Mrs. Plant. Why?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know,” said Alec helplessly.</p>

<p>“Nor do I! That’s just the annoying part. I
hate things I don’t understand. Always have done.
It’s a sort of challenge to get to the bottom of
them.”</p>

<p>“Are you going to get to the bottom of this?”
Alec smiled.</p>

<p>“If there’s a bottom to get to,” said Roger
defiantly. “So don’t grin in that infernally
sarcastic way. Dash it all, aren’t you curious?”</p>

<p>Alec hesitated. “Yes, I am in a way. But after
all, it doesn’t seem to be our business, does it?”</p>

<p>“That remains to be seen. What I want to find
out is—whose business is it? At present it seems to
be everybody’s.”</p>

<p>“And are you going to tell the police
anything?”</p>

<p>“No; I’m hanged if I am,” said Roger with
conviction. “I don’t mind whose business it is; but
it isn’t theirs. Not yet, anyway,” he added with a
touch of grimness.</p>

<p>Alec was plainly startled. “Good Lord! You
don’t think it might be eventually, do you?”</p>

<p>“I’m blessed if I know what to think! By the
way, reverting to Jefferson, you remember when I
found those ashes in the hearth and suggested that
they might be the remains of those mysterious
private documents Jefferson had been hinting
about? Well, did it appear to you that he looked
uncommonly relieved for the moment?”</p>

<p>Alec reflected. “I don’t think I was looking at
him just then.”</p>

<p>“Well, I was. And I made the suggestion on
purpose, to see how he’d take it. I’d take my oath that
the idea appealed to him immensely. Now why?
And what’s he got to do with Mr. Stanworth’s
private papers?”</p>

<p>“But look here, you know,” said Alec slowly,
“if he really was hiding something, as you seem to
think, surely he wouldn’t go and give the whole
show away by telling us straight out like that
what sort of thing it is that he’s hiding? I mean,
if he really is hiding something he’d mention papers
to put us off the scent, wouldn’t he? Really, I
mean, it would be something quite different. What
I mean is——”</p>

<p>“It’s all right. I’m beginning to get an idea of
what you mean,” said Roger kindly. “But
seriously, Alec, that’s rather an idea of yours. After
all, Jefferson isn’t the man to give himself away,
is he?”</p>

<p>“No,” said Alec earnestly. “You see, what I
mean is——”</p>

<p>“Hullo!” Roger interrupted rudely. “There’s
the inspector going down the drive. And without
Jefferson, by all that’s lucky! Let’s cut after him
and ask him if he’s brought anything else to the
surface.” And without waiting for a reply he set
off at a run in the wake of the retreating
inspector.</p>

<p>The latter, hearing their footsteps on the gravel,
turned round to wait for them.</p>

<p>“Well, sir?” he said with a smile. “Remembered
something else to tell me?”</p>

<p>Roger dropped into a walk. “No; but I was
wondering whether you had anything to tell me.
Found anything more out?”</p>

<p>“You’re not connected with the press by any
chance, Mr. Sheringham, are you?” the inspector
asked suspiciously.</p>

<p>“Oh, no; it’s just natural curiosity,” Roger
laughed. “Not for publication, and all that.”</p>

<p>“I was thinking you might get me into trouble
if it came out that I’d been talking more than I
ought to, sir. But I haven’t found anything more
out in any case.”</p>

<p>“Lady Stanworth wasn’t any help?”</p>

<p>“Not a bit, sir. She couldn’t throw any light on
it at all. I didn’t keep her long. Or any of the others,
either, for that matter. There was nothing more to
be got out of them, and I’ve got to get back and
make out my report.”</p>

<p>“Not even found the safe’s combination?”</p>

<p>“No,” returned the inspector disappointedly.
“I shall have to ring up the makers and get that.
I’ve taken a note of the number.”</p>

<p>“And who saw him last?”</p>

<p>“Mrs. Plant. He stopped her in the hall to ask
her if she liked some roses he’d had specially sent
up to her room for her, and left her to go into the
library. Nobody saw him after that.”</p>

<p>“And is the body still in there?”</p>

<p>“No, sir. We shan’t want that any more. The
constable I brought with me, Rudgeman, is helping
them take it upstairs now.”</p>

<p>The lodge gates appeared in sight, and Roger
halted.</p>

<p>“Well, good-bye, Inspector. Shall we see you
over here again?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir. I shall have to come over about that
safe. I don’t suppose we’ll find anything in it, and
it’s a ten-mile bicycle ride for me in this heat; but
there you are!” He laughed ruefully and went on
his way.</p>

<p>Roger and Alec turned and began to pace slowly
back to the house.</p>

<p>“So Mrs. Plant was the last to see him alive,
was she?” observed the former thoughtfully.
“That means she’ll be staying over for the inquest.
The others will be going this afternoon, I suppose.
What’s the time?”</p>

<p>Alec glanced at the watch on his wrist. “Just
past eleven.”</p>

<p>“And all that’s happened in two hours! My
hat! Well, come along with me. If the body’s been
removed, we may find the coast clear with any
luck.”</p>

<p>“What are you proposing to do now?” Alec
asked with interest.</p>

<p>“Look around that library.”</p>

<p>“Oh? What’s the idea?”</p>

<p>For once in his life a curious reluctance seemed
to have settled upon Roger. Almost nervously he
cleared his throat, and when at last he did
speak his voice was unwontedly grave.</p>

<p>“Well,” he said slowly, picking his words with
care; “there’s a thing that nobody else seems to
have noticed, but it’s been striking me more and
more forcibly every minute. I tell you candidly
it’s something rather horrible—a question that
I’m honestly rather frightened of finding the
answer to.”</p>

<p>“What are you driving at?” asked Alec in
perplexity.</p>

<p>Roger hesitated again.</p>

<p>“Look here,” he said suddenly, “if you were
going to shoot yourself, how would you go about
it? Wouldn’t you do it like this?”</p>

<p>He raised his hand and pointed an imaginary
revolver at a spot just above the right-hand end
of his right eyebrow.</p>

<p>Alec copied his action. “Well, yes, I might. It
seems the natural way to do it.”</p>

<p>“Exactly,” said Roger slowly. “Then why the
devil is that wound in the <em>centre</em> of Stanworth’s
forehead?”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch06">

<h2>CHAPTER VI. <br/> Four People Behave Remarkably</h2>

<p>Alec started, and his broad, good-humoured face
paled a little.</p>

<p>“Good Lord!” he ejaculated in startled tones.
“What on earth do you mean?”</p>

<p>“Simply what I say,” returned Roger. “Why
did Stanworth go out of his way to shoot himself
in such a remarkably difficult manner? Don’t
you see what I mean? It isn’t natural.”</p>

<p>Alec was staring up the drive. “Isn’t it? But
he did it all right, didn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Oh, of course he did it,” said Roger in a voice
that was curiously lacking in conviction. “But
what I can’t understand is this. Why, when he
could have done it so easily, did he go about it in
such a roundabout way? I mean, a revolver isn’t
such an easy thing to manipulate unhandily; and
the attitude he used must have twisted his wrist
most uncomfortably. Just try pointing your
forefinger in a straight line at the middle of your
forehead, and you’ll see what I mean.”</p>

<p>He suited his action to his words, and there was
no doubt about the constraint of his attitude. Alec
looked at him attentively.</p>

<p>“Yes, it does look awkward,” he commented.</p>

<p>“It is. Infernally awkward. And you saw where
the doctor took the bullet from. Almost at the
very back. That means the revolver must have
been nearly in a dead straight line. You try and
see how difficult it is. It almost dislocates your
elbow.”</p>

<p>Alec copied the action. “You’re quite right,” he
said with interest. “It is uncomfortable.”</p>

<p>“I should call it more than that. It’s so
unnatural as to be highly improbable. Yet there’s the
fact.”</p>

<p>“Can’t get away from facts, you know,”
observed Alec sagely.</p>

<p>“No, but you can explain them. And I’m dashed
if I can see the explanation for this one.”</p>

<p>“Well, what’s the idea?” Alec asked curiously.
“You’re being infernally mysterious.”</p>

<p>“Me? I like that. It isn’t I who am being
mysterious. It’s everything else. Facts and people
and everything. Look here, we won’t go in for a
moment. Let’s find a seat somewhere and try and
get a grip on things. I’m getting out of my depth,
and I don’t like it.”</p>

<p>He led the way to where a few garden chairs
were scattered beneath a big cedar at one of the
corners of the lawn, and threw himself into one of
them. Alec followed suit, somewhat more
cautiously. Alec was a big person, and he had met
garden chairs before.</p>

<p>“Proceed,” he said, fishing for his pipe. “You
interest me strangely.”</p>

<p>Nothing loth, Roger took up his tale.</p>

<p>“Well, then, in the first place let’s consider the
human side of things. Hasn’t it struck you that
there are four separate and distinct people here
whose conduct during the last few hours has been,
to say the least of it, remarkable?”</p>

<p>“No,” said Alec candidly, “it hasn’t. Two have,
I know. Who are the other two?”</p>

<p>“Well, the butler is one. He didn’t seem
particularly cut up over Stanworth’s death, did he?
Not that you look for a tremendous display of
emotion from a great hulking brute like that, true.
But you do look for some.”</p>

<p>“He wasn’t vastly upset,” Alec admitted.</p>

<p>“And then there is his position in the
household. Why should an ex-prize-fighter turn butler?
The two professions don’t seem to harmonise
somehow. And why should Stanworth want to employ
an ex-prize-fighting butler for that matter? It’s
not what you’d expect from him. He always
seemed to me particularly meticulous over points
of etiquette. I wouldn’t have called him a snob
exactly; he was too nice and jolly for that. But
he did like to be taken for a gentleman. And
gentlemen don’t employ prize-fighting butlers, do they?”</p>

<p>“I’ve never heard of it being done before,”
Alec conceded cautiously.</p>

<p>“Precisely. My point exactly. Alec, you’re
positively sparkling this morning.”</p>

<p>“Thanks,” Alec growled, lighting his pipe.
“But apparently not enough so to make out who
the fourth of your suspicious people is. Get on
with it.”</p>

<p>“After you with that match. Why, didn’t it
strike you that somebody else took the news of
Stanworth’s death with remarkable fortitude?
And that after it had been broken to her with a
bluntness that verged on brutality.”</p>

<p>Alec paused in the act of applying a second
match to his refractory pipe. “By Jove! You
mean Lady Stanworth?”</p>

<p>“I do,” said Roger complacently.</p>

<p>“Yes, I did notice that,” Alec remarked,
staring over his pipe at his companion. “But I don’t
think there was much love lost between those two,
was there?”</p>

<p>“You’re right. There wasn’t. I shouldn’t mind
going farther than that and saying that she
absolutely hated old Stanworth. I noticed it lots
of times these last three days, and it puzzled me
even then. Now——” He paused and sucked at his
pipe once or twice. “Now it puzzles me a good
deal more,” he concluded softly, almost as if
speaking to himself.</p>

<p>“Go on,” Alec prompted interestedly.</p>

<p>“Well, that’s four people; two whose behaviour
has not been quite what you’d expect under the
circumstances, and two who are downright
suspicious. Anyhow, you can say four curious people.”</p>

<p>Alec nodded in silence. He was thinking of a
fifth person whose conduct early that morning
had been something more than curious. With an
effort he thrust the thought from him abruptly.
At any rate, Roger was going to know nothing
about that.</p>

<p>“And now we come to facts, and the Lord knows
these are curious enough, too. First of all, we’ve
got the place of the wound and the extreme
unlikelihood (as one would have said if one hadn’t
actually seen it) of anyone committing suicide by
shooting himself in that particular way. About that
I’m not going to say any more for the moment.
But there are plenty of things to talk about
without that.”</p>

<p>“There would be, with you anywhere about,”
Alec murmured irreverently.</p>

<p>“You wait. This is serious. Now according to
what they say, people went to bed in pretty
decent time, last night, didn’t they? Mrs. Plant
after meeting Stanworth in the hall; Barbara and
her mother soon after you came in from the
garden; and Jefferson and you after you’d finished
playing billiards?”</p>

<p>“That’s right,” Alec nodded. “Eleven
thirtyish.”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Roger triumphantly. “Somebody’s
lying! I was working in my room till past one, and
I heard footsteps in the corridor not once but two
or three times between midnight and then—the
last time just as I was knocking off! Of course I
didn’t pay any particular attention to them at
the time; but I know I’m not mistaken. So if
everyone says that they were in their rooms by
eleven-thirty (except Stanworth, who was
presumably locked in the library), then I
repeat—somebody’s lying! Now what do you make of that?”</p>

<p>“Heaven only knows,” said Alec helplessly,
puffing vigorously at his pipe. “What do you?”</p>

<p>“Beyond the bare fact that somebody’s lying,
nothing—yet! But that’s quite enough for the
present. Then there’s another thing. You
remember where those keys were? In the waistcoat
pocket above the one in which he usually kept
them. The inspector just remarked that he must
have put them in the wrong pocket. Now, do you
think that’s likely?”</p>

<p>“Might be done. I don’t see anything wildly
improbable in it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, no; not wildly improbable. But improbable
enough, for all that. Have you ever done it, for
instance?”</p>

<p>“Put a thing in the wrong pocket? Lord, yes;
heaps of times.”</p>

<p>“No, you idiot. Not just in any wrong pocket.
In the upper pocket of a waistcoat instead of the
lower.”</p>

<p>Alec considered. “I don’t know. Haven’t I!”</p>

<p>“Probably not. Once again, it’s an unnatural
mistake. One doesn’t use the upper pockets of a
waistcoat much. They’re not easy to get at. But
consider this. When you want to slip a thing into
the lower pocket of a waistcoat that’s hanging on a
chair, it’s the easiest thing in the world to put it
in the upper pocket by mistake. Done it myself
hundreds of times.”</p>

<p>Alec whistled softly. “I see what you’re getting
at. You mean——”</p>

<p>“Absolutely! A waistcoat worn by somebody
else is in the same category as a waistcoat hanging
on a chair. If we’re to go by probabilities, then the
most likely thing is that somebody else put those
keys in that pocket. Not Stanworth himself at all.”</p>

<p>“But who on earth do you imagine did it?
Jefferson?”</p>

<p>“Jefferson!” Roger repeated scornfully. “Of
course not Jefferson! That’s the whole point.
Jefferson was looking for those keys; and it’s just
because they were in the wrong pocket and he
didn’t know it, that he couldn’t find them. That’s
plain enough.”</p>

<p>“Sorry!” Alec apologised.</p>

<p>“Well, this is all wrong, don’t you see? It
complicates things still more. Here’s a fifth mysterious
person to be added to our list of suspicious
characters.”</p>

<p>“Then you don’t think it was Mrs. Plant?”
Alec said tentatively.</p>

<p>“I <em>know</em> it wasn’t Mrs. Plant. She was playing
about with the knob of the safe; she hadn’t got
the keys. And in any case, even if she had, there
was no possibility of her getting them back again.
No, we’ve got to look elsewhere. Now let’s see,
when was that library left empty?” He paused
for reflection. “Jefferson was there alone while I
was in the dining room (I should like to know why
Mrs. Plant fainted, by the way; but we’ve got to
wait for that till the safe’s opened); but he didn’t
find the keys. Then we both went into the garden.
Then I met you, and we caught Mrs. Plant almost
immediately afterwards. How long was I with
Jefferson? Not more than ten minutes or so.
Then the keys must have been disturbed in that
ten minutes before Mrs. Plant went into the
library (there was no opportunity later; you
remember we kept the library under inspection
after that till the police arrived). Either then,
or——” He hesitated and was silent.</p>

<p>“Yes?” said Alec curiously. “Or when else?”</p>

<p>“Nothing!—Well, anyhow, there’s plenty of food
for thought there, isn’t there?”</p>

<p>“It does give one something to think about,”
Alec agreed, puffing vigorously.</p>

<p>“Oh, and one other thing; possibly of no
importance whatever. There was a slight scratch on
Stanworth’s right wrist.”</p>

<p>“Rose bush!” replied Alec promptly. “He was
always playing about with them, wasn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Ye-es,” Roger replied doubtfully. “That
occurred to me, of course. But somehow I don’t
think it was a scratch from a rose. It was fairly
broad, for instance; not a thin, deep line like a
rose’s scratch. However, that’s neither here nor
there; probably it’s got nothing to do with
anything. Well, that’s the lot. Now—what do you
make of it all?”</p>

<p>“If you want my candid opinion,” said Alec
carefully, after a little pause, “I think that you’re
making mountains out of molehills. In other words,
attaching too much importance to trifles. After
all, when you come to think of it there’s nothing
particularly serious in any of the things you
mentioned, is there? And you can’t tell; there may be
a perfectly innocent explanation even for Jefferson
and Mrs. Plant.”</p>

<p>Roger smoked thoughtfully for a minute or two.</p>

<p>“There may be, of course,” he said at length;
“in fact, I hope to goodness there is. But as for
the rest, I agree with you that they’re only
molehills in themselves; but don’t forget that if you
pile sufficient molehills on top of each other you
get a mountain. And that’s what I can’t help
thinking is the case here. Separately these little facts
are nothing; but collectively they make me wonder
rather furiously.”</p>

<p>Alec shrugged his shoulders. “Curiosity killed
the cat,” he remarked pointedly.</p>

<p>“Possibly,” Roger laughed. “But I’m not a cat,
and I thrive on it. Anyway, my mind’s made up
on one point. I’m going to nose round and just
see whether there isn’t any more to be found out.
I liked old Stanworth, and as long as it seems to me
that there’s the least possibility of his having
been——” He checked himself abruptly. “Of
all not being quite as it should,” he resumed after
a momentary pause. “Well, I’m going to make it
my business to look into it. Now, what I want to
ask you is—will you help me?”</p>

<p>Alec regarded his friend silently for a minute or
two, his hand cradling the bowl of the pipe he was
smoking.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he announced at length; “on one
condition. That whatever you may find out, you won’t
take any important steps without telling me.
You see, I don’t know that I consider this
absolutely playing the game in a way; and I want——”</p>

<p>“You can make yourself easy on that score,”
Roger smiled. “If we go into it, we go in together;
and I won’t do anything, not only without telling
you, but even without your consent. That’s only
fair.”</p>

<p>“And you’ll let me know anything you may find
out as you go along?” asked Alec suspiciously.
“Not keep things up your sleeve, like Holmes did
to old Watson?”</p>

<p>“Of course not, my dear chap! If it comes to
that, I don’t suppose I could if I wanted to. I
must have somebody to confide in.”</p>

<p>“You’ll make a rotten detective, Roger,” Alec
grinned. “You gas too much. The best detectives
are thin-lipped, hatchet-faced devils who creep
about the place not saying a word to anybody.”</p>

<p>“In the story-books. You bet they don’t in real
life. I expect they talk their heads off to their
seconds-in-command. It’s so jolly helpful. Holmes
must have missed an awful lot by not letting
himself go to Watson. For one thing, the very act of
talking helps one to clarify one’s own ideas and
suggests further ones.”</p>

<p>“Your ideas ought to be pretty clear then,”
said Alec rudely.</p>

<p>“And besides,” Roger went on unperturbed,
“I’d bet anything that Watson was jolly useful to
Holmes. Those absurd theories of the poor old
chap’s that Holmes always ridiculed so
mercilessly (I wish Watson had been allowed to hit on
the truth just once; it would have pleased him so
tremendously)—why, I shouldn’t be at all
surprised if they didn’t suggest the right idea to
Holmes time and time again; but of course, he
would never have acknowledged it. Anyhow, the
moral is, you talk away for all you’re worth and
I’ll do the same. And if we don’t manage to find
something out between us, you can write me down
an ass. And yourself, too, Alexander!”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch07">

<h2>CHAPTER VII. <br/> The Vase That Wasn’t</h2>

<p>“Very well, Sherlock,” said Alec. “And what’s the
first move?”</p>

<p>“The library,” Roger replied promptly, and
rose to his feet.</p>

<p>Alec followed suit and they turned towards the
house.</p>

<p>“What do you expect to find?” asked the latter
curiously.</p>

<p>“I’m blessed if I know,” Roger confessed. “In
fact, I can’t really say that I actually expect to
find anything. I’ve got hopes, of course, but in
no definite direction.”</p>

<p>“Bit vague, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>“Thoroughly. That’s the interesting part. All
we can do is to look around and try and notice
anything at all, however slight, that seems to be
just out of the ordinary. Ten to one it won’t mean
anything at all; and even if it does, it’s another
ten to one that we shan’t be able to see it. But as
I said, there’s always hope.”</p>

<p>“But what are we going to look for? Things
connected with the people you mentioned; or
just—well, just things?”</p>

<p>“Anything! Anything and everything, and
trust to luck. Now step quietly over this bit of
gravel. We don’t want everyone to know that
we’re nosing around in here.”</p>

<p>They stepped carefully over the path and
entered the library. It was empty, but the door into
the hall was slightly ajar. Roger crossed the room
and closed it. Then he looked carefully round him.</p>

<p>“Where do we start operations?” Alec asked
with interest.</p>

<p>“Well,” Roger said slowly, “I’m just trying to
get a general sort of impression. This is really the
first time we’ve been able to look round in peace,
you know.”</p>

<p>“What sort of impression?”</p>

<p>Roger considered. “It’s rather hard to put into
words exactly; but I’ve got a more or less retentive
sort of mind. I mean, I can look at a thing or a
place and carry the picture in my brain for quite a
time. I’ve trained myself to it. It’s jolly useful for
storing up ideas for descriptions of scenery and
that sort of thing. Photographic, you might call it.
Well, it struck me that if there had been any
important alteration in this room during the last
few hours—if the position of the safe had been
altered, for instance, or anything like that—I
should probably be able to spot it.”</p>

<p>“And you think that’s going to help now?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know in the least. But there’s no harm
in trying, is there?”</p>

<p>He walked to the middle of the room and turned
slowly about, letting the picture sink into his brain.
When he had made the complete circuit, he sat on
the edge of the table and shut his eyes.</p>

<p>Alec watched him interestedly. “Any luck?” he
asked, after a couple of minutes’ silence.</p>

<p>Roger opened his eyes. “No,” he admitted, a
little ruefully. It is always disappointing after
such carefully staged preparations to find that
one’s pet trick has failed to work. Roger felt not
unlike a conjuror who had not succeeded in
producing the rabbit from the top-hat.</p>

<p>“Ah!” observed Alec noncommittally.</p>

<p>“I can’t see anything different,” said Roger,
almost apologetically.</p>

<p>“Ah!” Alec remarked again. “Then I suppose
that means that nothing is different?” he
suggested helpfully.</p>

<p>“I suppose so,” Roger admitted.</p>

<p>“Now are you going to tell me that this is really
devilish significant?” Alec grinned. “Because
if you do, I warn you that I shan’t believe you.
It’s exactly what I expected. I told you you were
making too much fuss about a lot of trifles.”</p>

<p>“Shut up!” Roger snapped from the edge of the
table. “I’m thinking.”</p>

<p>“Oh, sorry!”</p>

<p>Roger took no notice of his fellow sleuth’s
unprofessionally derisive grin. He was staring
abstractedly at the big carved oak chimney-piece.</p>

<p>“There’s only one thing that strikes me,” he
observed slowly after a little pause, “now I come
to think of it. Doesn’t that chimney-piece look
somehow a bit lopsided to you?”</p>

<p>Alec followed the other’s gaze. The chimney-piece
looked ordinary enough. There were the
usual pewter plates and mugs set out upon it,
and on one side stood a large blue china vase. For
a moment Alec stared at it in silence. Then:</p>

<p>“I’m blessed if I see anything lopsided about it,”
he announced. “How do you mean?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know exactly,” Roger replied, still
gazing at it curiously. “All I can say is that in
some way it doesn’t look quite right to me.
Side-heavy, if I may coin a phrase.”</p>

<p>“You may,” said Alec kindly. “That is, if
you’ll tell me what it means.”</p>

<p>“Well, unsymmetrical, if you like that better.”
He slapped his knee suddenly. “By Jove! Idiot!
I see now. Of course!” He turned a triumphant
smile upon the other. “Fancy not noticing that
before?”</p>

<p>“<em>What?</em>” shouted Alec in exasperation.</p>

<p>“Why, that vase. Don’t you see?”</p>

<p>Alec looked at the vase. It seemed a very
ordinary sort of affair.</p>

<p>“What’s the matter with it? It looks all right to
me.”</p>

<p>“Oh, there’s nothing the matter with it,” said
Roger airily. “It is all right.”</p>

<p>Alec approached the table and clenched a large
fist, which he proceeded to hold two inches in front
of Roger’s nose.</p>

<p>“If you don’t tell me within thirty seconds what
you’re talking about, I shall smite you,” he said
grimly. “<em>Hard!</em>”</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you,” said Roger quickly. “I’m not
allowed to be smitten before lunch. Doctor’s
orders. He’s very strict about it, indeed. Oh, yes;
about that vase. Well, don’t you see? There’s only
one of it!”</p>

<p>“Is that all?” asked Alec, turning away
disgustedly. “I thought from the fuss you were
making that you’d discovered something really
exciting.”</p>

<p>“So I have,” returned Roger, unabashed. “You
see, the exciting part is that yesterday, I am
prepared to swear, there were two of it.”</p>

<p>“Oh? How do you know that?”</p>

<p>“Because now I come to realise it, I remember
an impression of well-balanced orderliness about
that chimney-piece. It was a typical man’s room
chimney-piece. Women are the unsymmetrical
sex, you know. The fact of there being only one
vase alters its whole appearance.”</p>

<p>“Well?” Alec still did not appear to be very
much impressed. “And what’s that got to do with
anything?”</p>

<p>“Probably nothing. It’s just a fact that since
yesterday afternoon the second vase has
disappeared; that’s all. It may have been broken
somehow by Stanworth himself; one of the servants
may have knocked it over; Lady Stanworth may
have taken it to put some flowers in—anything!
But as it’s the only new fact that seems to emerge,
let’s look into it.”</p>

<p>Roger left the table and strolled leisurely over to
the fireplace.</p>

<p>“You’re wasting your time,” Alec growled,
unconvinced. “What are you going to do? Ask the
servants about it?”</p>

<p>“Not yet, at any rate,” Roger replied from the
hearthrug. He stood on tip-toe to get a view of
the surface of the chimney-piece. “Here you are!”
he exclaimed excitedly. “What did I tell you?
Look at this! The room hasn’t been dusted this
morning, of course. Here’s a ring where the vase
stood.”</p>

<p>He dragged a chair across and mounted it to
obtain a better view. Alec’s inch or two of extra
height enabled him to see well enough by standing
on the shallow fender. There was very little dust
on the chimney-piece, but enough to show a faint
though well-defined ring upon the surface. Roger
reached across for the other vase and fitted its
base over the mark. It coincided exactly.</p>

<p>“That proves it,” Roger remarked with some
satisfaction. “I knew I was right, of course; but
it’s always pleasant to be able to prove it.” He
bent forward and examined the surface closely.
“I wonder what on earth all these other little
marks are, though,” he went on thoughtfully. “I
don’t seem able to account for them. What do you
make of them?”</p>

<p>Dotted about both in the ring and outside it were
a number of faint impressions in the shallow dust;
some large and broad, others quite small. All
were irregular in shape, and their edges merged so
imperceptibly into the surrounding dust that it
was impossible to say where one began or the other
ended. A few inches to the left of the ring, however,
the dust had been swept clean away across the
whole depth of the surface for a width of nearly a
foot.</p>

<p>“I don’t know,” Alec confessed. “They don’t
convey anything to me, I’m afraid. I should say
that somebody’s simply put something down here
and taken it away again later. I don’t see that it’s
particularly important in any case.”</p>

<p>“Probably it isn’t. But it’s interesting. I suppose
you must be right. I can’t see any other
explanation, I’m bound to say. But it must have been a
very curiously shaped object, to leave those marks.
Or could it have been a number of things? And
why should the dust have been scraped away like
that? Something must have been drawn across the
surface; something flat and smooth and fairly
heavy.” He meditated for a moment. “It’s
funny.”</p>

<p>Alec stepped back from the fender. “Well, we
don’t seem to be progressing much, do we?”
he remarked. “Let’s try somewhere else,
Sherlock.”</p>

<p>He wandered aimlessly over towards the French
windows and stood looking out into the garden.</p>

<p>A sharp exclamation from Roger caused him to
wheel round suddenly. The latter had descended
from his chair, and was now standing on the
hearth-rug and looking with interest at something
he held in his hand.</p>

<p>“Here!” he said, holding out his palm, in which
a small blue object was lying. “Come and look at
this. I stepped on it just now as I got down from the
chair. It was on the rug. What do you think of it?”</p>

<p>Alec took the object, which proved to be a small
piece of broken blue china, and turned it over
carefully.</p>

<p>“Why, this is a bit of that other vase!” he said
sagely.</p>

<p>“Excellent, Alexander Watson. It is.”</p>

<p>Alec scrutinised the fragment more closely. “It
must have got broken,” he announced profoundly.</p>

<p>“Brilliant! Your deductive powers are in
wonderful form this morning, Alec,” Roger smiled.
Then his face became more grave. “But seriously,
this is really rather perplexing. You see what
must have happened, of course. The vase got
broken where it stood. In view of this bit, that’s
the only possible explanation for those marks on
the chimney-piece. They must have been caused
by the broken pieces. And that broad patch was
made by someone sweeping the pieces off the
shelf—the same person, presumably, as picked up the
larger bits round that ring.”</p>

<p>He paused and looked at Alec inquiringly.</p>

<p>“Well?” said that worthy.</p>

<p>“Well, don’t you see the difficulty? Vases don’t
suddenly break where they stand. They fall and
smash on the ground or something like that. This
one calmly fell to pieces in its place, as far as I can
see. Dash it all, it isn’t natural!—And that’s about
the third unnatural thing we’ve had already,”
he added in tones of mingled triumph and
resentment.</p>

<p>Alec pressed the tobacco carefully down in his
pipe and struck a match. “Aren’t you going the
long way round again?” he asked slowly. “Surely
there’s an obvious explanation. Someone knocked
the vase over on its side and it broke on the shelf.
I can’t see anything wrong with that.”</p>

<p>“I can,” said Roger quickly. “Two things. In
the first place, those vases were far too thick to
break like that simply through being knocked over
on a wooden surface. In the second, even if it had
been, you’d get a smooth, elliptical mark in the
dust where it fell; and there isn’t one. No, there’s
only one possible reason for it to break as it did,
as far as I can make out.”</p>

<p>“And what’s that, Sherlock?”</p>

<p>“That it had been struck by something—and
struck so hard and cleanly that it simply smashed
where it stood and was not knocked into the
hearth. What do you think of that?”</p>

<p>“It seems reasonable enough,” Alec conceded
after consideration.</p>

<p>“You’re not very enthusiastic, are you? It’s
so jolly eminently reasonable that it must be right.
Now, then, the next question is—who or what hit it
like that?”</p>

<p>“I say, do you think this is going to lead
anywhere?” Alec asked suddenly. “Aren’t we
wasting time over this rotten vase? I don’t see what it
can have to do with what we’re looking for. Not
that I have the least idea what that is, in any case,”
he added candidly.</p>

<p>“You don’t seem to have taken to my vase,
Alec. It’s a pity, because I’m getting more and
more fond of it every minute. Anyhow, I’m going
to put in one or two minutes’ really hard thinking
about it; so if you’d like to wander out into the
garden and have a chat with William, don’t let me
keep you.”</p>

<p>Alec had strolled over to the windows again. For
some reason he seemed somewhat anxious to keep
the garden under observation as far as possible.</p>

<p>“Oh, I won’t interrupt you,” he was beginning
carelessly, when at the same moment the reason
appeared in sight, walking slowly on to the lawn
from the direction of the rose garden. “Well, as a
matter of fact, perhaps I will wander out for a
bit,” he emended hurriedly. “Won’t stay away
long, in case anything else crops up.” And he made
a hasty exit.</p>

<p>Roger, following with his eyes the bee-line his
newly appointed assistant was taking, smiled
slightly and resumed his labours.</p>

<p>Alec did not waste time. There was a question
which had been worrying him horribly during the
last couple of hours, and he wanted an answer to
it, and wanted it quickly.</p>

<p>“Barbara,” he said abruptly, as soon as he came
abreast of her, “you know what you told me this
morning. Before breakfast. It hadn’t anything to
do with what’s happened here, had it?”</p>

<p>Barbara blushed painfully. Then as suddenly
she paled.</p>

<p>“You mean—about Mr. Stanworth’s death?”
she asked steadily, looking him full in the eyes.</p>

<p>Alec nodded.</p>

<p>“No, it hadn’t. That was only a—a horrible
coincidence.” She paused. “Why?” she asked
suddenly.</p>

<p>Alec looked supremely uncomfortable. “Oh,
I don’t know. You see, you said something
about—well, about a horrible thing that had happened.
And then half an hour later, when we knew that—I
mean, I couldn’t help wondering just for the
moment whether——” He floundered into silence.</p>

<p>“It’s all right, Alec,” said Barbara gently. “It
was a perfectly reasonable mistake to make. As I
said, that was only a dreadful coincidence.”</p>

<p>“And aren’t you going to change your mind about
what you said this morning?” asked Alec humbly.</p>

<p>Barbara looked at him quickly. “Why should
I?” she returned swiftly. “I mean——” She
hesitated and corrected herself. “Why should you
think I might?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know. You were very upset this
morning, and it occurred to me that you might have had
bad news and were acting on the spur of the
moment; and perhaps when you had thought it
over, you might——” He broke off meaningly.</p>

<p>Barbara seemed strangely ill at ease. She did
not reply at once to Alec’s unspoken question, but
twisted her wisp of a handkerchief between her
fingers with nervous gestures that were curiously
out of place in this usually uncommonly
self-possessed young person.</p>

<p>“Oh, I don’t know what to say,” she replied at
last, in low, hurried tones. “I can’t tell you
anything at present, Alec. I may have acted too much
on the spur of the moment. I don’t know. Come
and see me when we get back from the Mertons’
next month. I shall have to think things over.”</p>

<p>“And you won’t tell me what the trouble was,
dear?”</p>

<p>“No, I can’t. Please don’t ask me that, Alec.
You see, that isn’t really my secret. No, I can’t
possibly tell you!”</p>

<p>“All right. But—but you do love me, don’t
you?”</p>

<p>Barbara laid her hand on his arm with a swift,
caressing movement. “It wasn’t anything to do
with that, old boy,” she said softly. “Come and
see me next month. I think—I think I <em>might</em>
have changed my mind again by then. No, Alec!
You mustn’t! Anyhow, not here of all places.
Perhaps I’ll let you once—just a tiny one!—before
we go; but not unless you’re good. Besides, I’ve got
to run in and pack now. We’re catching the two
forty-one, and Mother will be waiting for me.”</p>

<p>She gave his hand a sudden squeeze and turned
towards the house.</p>

<p>“That was a bit of luck, meeting her out here!”
murmured Alec raptly to himself as he watched
her go. Wherein he was not altogether correct in
his statement of fact; for as the lady had come into
the garden for that express purpose, the subsequent
meeting might be said to be due rather to good
generalship than good luck.</p>

<p>It was therefore a remarkably jubilant Watson
who returned blithely to the library to find his
Sherlock sitting solemnly in the chair before the
big writing table and staring hard at the
chimney-piece.</p>

<p>In spite of himself he shivered slightly. “Ugh,
you ghoulish brute!” he exclaimed.</p>

<p>Roger looked at him abstractedly. “What’s
up?”</p>

<p>“Well, I can’t say that I should like to sit in
that particular chair just yet awhile.”</p>

<p>“I’m glad you’ve come back,” Roger said, rising
slowly to his feet. “I’ve just had a pretty curious
idea, and I’m going to test it. The chances are
several million to one against it coming off, but
if it <em>does</em>——! Well, I don’t know what the devil
we’re going to do!”</p>

<p>He had spoken so seriously that Alec gaped at
him in surprise. “Good Lord, what’s up now?”
he asked.</p>

<p>“Well, I won’t say in so many words,” Roger
replied slowly, “because it’s really too fantastic.
But it’s to do with the breaking of that second
vase. You remember I said that in order for it to
have smashed like that it must have been struck
extraordinarily hard by some mysterious object.
It’s just occurred to me what that object might
possibly have been.”</p>

<p>He walked across to where the chair was still
standing in front of the fireplace and stepped up
on to it. Then, with a glance towards the chair he
had just left, he began to examine the woodwork
at the back of the chimney-piece. Alec watched
him in silence. Suddenly he bent forward with
close attention and prodded a finger at the panel;
and Alec noticed that his face had gone very pale.</p>

<p>He turned and descended, a little unsteadily,
from the chair. “My hat, but I was right!” he
exclaimed softly, staring at Alec with raised
eyebrows. “That second vase was smashed by a
bullet! You’ll find its mark just behind that little
pillar on the left there.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch08">

<h2>CHAPTER VIII. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Becomes Startling</h2>

<p>For a moment there was silence between the two.
Then:</p>

<p>“Great Scott!” Alec remarked. “Absolutely
certain?”</p>

<p>“Absolutely. It’s a bullet mark all right. The
bullet isn’t there, but it must have just embedded
itself in the wood and been dug out with a
pen-knife. You can see the marks of the blade round
the hole. Get up and have a look.”</p>

<p>Alec stepped on to the chair and felt the hole in
the wood with a large forefinger. “Couldn’t be
an old mark, could it?” he asked, examining it
curiously. “Some of this panelling’s been pretty
well knocked about.”</p>

<p>“No; I thought of that. An old hole would have
the edges more or less smoothed down; those
are quite jagged and splintery. And where the
knife’s cut the wood away the surface is quite
different to the rest. Not so dark. No; that mark’s
a recent one, all right.”</p>

<p>Alec got down from the chair. “What do you
make of it?” he asked abruptly.</p>

<p>“I’m not sure,” said Roger slowly. “It means
rather a drastic rearrangement of our ideas, doesn’t
it? But I’ll tell you one highly important fact,
and that is that a line from this mark through the
middle of the ring in the dust leads straight to the
chair in front of the writing table. That seems
to me jolly significant. I tell you what. Let’s go
out on to the lawn and talk it over. We don’t want
to stay in here too long in any case.”</p>

<p>He carefully replaced the chair on the hearth-rug
in its proper position and walked out into the
garden. Alec dutifully followed, and they made for
the cedar tree once more.</p>

<p>“Go on,” said the latter when they were seated.
“This is going to be interesting.”</p>

<p>Roger frowned abstractedly. He was enjoying
himself hugely. With his capacity for throwing
himself heart and soul into whatever he happened
to be doing at the moment, he was already
beginning to assume the profound airs of a great
detective. The pose was a perfectly unconscious one;
but none the less typical.</p>

<p>“Well, taking as our starting point the fact that
the bullet was fired from a line which includes the
chair in which Mr. Stanworth was sitting,” he
began learnedly, “and assuming, as I think we have
every right to do, that it was fired between, let us
say, the hours of midnight and two o’clock this
morning, the first thing that strikes us is the fact
that in all probability it must have been fired by
Mr. Stanworth himself.”</p>

<p>“We then remember,” said Alec gravely, “that
the inspector particularly mentioned that only one
shot had been fired from Mr. Stanworth’s revolver,
and realise at once what idiots we were to have
been struck by anything of the kind. In other
words, try again!”</p>

<p>“Yes, that is rather a nuisance,” said Roger
thoughtfully. “I was forgetting that.”</p>

<p>“I thought you were,” remarked Alec unkindly.</p>

<p>Roger pondered. “This is very dark and
difficult,” he said at length, dropping the pontifical
manner he had assumed. “As far as I can see it’s
the only reasonable theory that the second shot
was fired by old Stanworth. The only other
alternative is that it was fired by somebody else, who
happened to be standing in a direct line with
Stanworth and the vase and who was using a
revolver of the same, or nearly the same, calibre as
Stanworth’s. That doesn’t seem very likely on the
face of it, does it?”</p>

<p>“But more so than that it was a shot from
Stanworth’s revolver which was never fired at all,”
Alec commented dryly.</p>

<p>“Well, why did the inspector say that only one
shot had been fired from that revolver?” Roger
asked. “Because there was only one empty shell.
But mark this. He mentioned at the same time
that the revolver wasn’t fully loaded. Now,
wouldn’t it have been possible for Stanworth to
have fired that shot and then for some reason or
other (Heaven knows what!) to have extracted
the shell?”</p>

<p>“It would, I suppose; yes. But in that case
wouldn’t you expect to find the shell somewhere
in the room?”</p>

<p>“Well, it may be there. We haven’t looked for
it yet. Anyhow, we can’t get away from the fact
that in all probability Stanworth did fire that other
shot. Now why did he fire it?”</p>

<p>“Search me!” said Alec laconically.</p>

<p>“I think we can rule out the idea that he was
just taking a pot-shot at the vase out of sheer <i lang="fr">joie
de vivre</i>, or that he was trying to shoot himself
and was such a bad shot that he hit something in
the exact opposite direction.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I think we might rule those out,” said
Alec cautiously.</p>

<p>“Well, then, Stanworth was firing with an
object. What at? Obviously some other person. So
Stanworth was not alone in the library last night,
after all! We’re getting on, aren’t we?”</p>

<p>“A jolly sight too fast,” Alec grumbled. “You
don’t even know for anything like certain that the
second shot was fired last night at all, and——”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, I do, friend Alec. The vase was
broken last night.”</p>

<p>“Well, in any case, you don’t know that
Stanworth fired it. And here you are already inventing
somebody else for him to shoot at? It’s too rapid
for me.”</p>

<p>“Alec, you are Scotch, aren’t you?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I am. But what’s that got to do with
it?”</p>

<p>“Oh, nothing; except that your bump of native
caution seems to be remarkably well developed.
Try and get over it. I’ll take the plunges; you
follow. Where had we got to? Oh, yes; Stanworth
was not alone in the library last night. Now, then,
what does that give us?”</p>

<p>“Heaven only knows what it won’t give you,”
murmured Alec despairingly.</p>

<p>“I know what it’s going to give you,” retorted
Roger complacently, “and that’s a shock. It’s my
firm impression that old Stanworth never
committed suicide at all last night.”</p>

<p>“What?” Alec gasped. “What on earth do you
mean?”</p>

<p>“That he was murdered!”</p>

<p>Alec lowered his pipe and stared with
incredulous eyes at his companion.</p>

<p>“My dear old chap,” he said after a little pause,
“have you gone suddenly quite daft?”</p>

<p>“On the contrary,” replied Roger calmly, “I
was never so remarkably sane in my life.”</p>

<p>“But—but how could he possibly have been
murdered? The windows all fastened and the door
locked on the inside, with the key in the lock as
well! And, good Lord, his own statement sitting
on the table in front of him! Roger, my dear old
chap, you’re mad.”</p>

<p>“To say nothing of the fact that his grip on the
revolver was—what did the doctor call it? Oh,
yes; properly adjusted, and must have been
applied during life. Yes, there are certainly
difficulties, Alec, I grant you.”</p>

<p>Alec shrugged his shoulders eloquently. “This
affair’s gone to your head,” he said shortly. “Talk
about making mountains out of molehills! Good
Lord! You’re making a whole range of them out
of a single worm-cast.”</p>

<p>“Very prettily put, Alec,” Roger commented
approvingly. “Perhaps I am. But my impression
is that old Stanworth was murdered. I might be
wrong, of course,” he added candidly. “But I very
seldom am.”</p>

<p>“But dash it all, the thing’s out of the question!
You’re going the wrong way round once more.
Even if there was a second man in the library last
night—which I very much doubt!—you can’t
get away from the fact that he must have gone
before Stanworth locked himself in like that. That
being the case, we get back to suicide again. You
can’t have it both ways, you know. I’m not saying
that this mythical person may not have put
pressure of some sort on Stanworth (that is, if he ever
existed at all) and forced him to commit suicide.
But as for murder——! Why, the idea’s too dashed
silly for words!” Alec was getting quite heated at
this insult to his logic.</p>

<p>Roger was unperturbed. “Yes,” he said
thoughtfully, “I had an idea it would be a bit of a shock
to you. But to tell you the truth I was a bit
suspicious about this suicide business almost from
the very first. I couldn’t get over the place of the
wound, you know. And then all the rest of it,
windows and door and confession and what not—well,
instead of reassuring me, they made me more
suspicious still. I couldn’t help feeling more and
more that it was a case of <i lang="fr">Qui s’excuse, s’accuse</i>.
Or to put it in another way, that the whole scene
looked like a stage very carefully arranged for the
second act after all the débris of the first act had
been cleared away. Foolish of me, no doubt, but
that’s what I felt.”</p>

<p>Alec snorted. “Foolish! That’s putting it
mildly.”</p>

<p>“Don’t be so harsh with me, Alec,” Roger
pleaded. “I think I’m being rather brilliant.”</p>

<p>“You always were a chap to let things run away
with you,” Alec grunted. “Just because a couple
of people act a little queerly and a couple more
don’t look as mournful as you think they ought,
you dash off and rake up a little murder all to
yourself. Going to tell the inspector about this
wonderful idea of yours?”</p>

<p>“No, I’m not,” said Roger with decision. “This
is my little murder, as you’re good enough to call
it, and I’m not going to be done out of it. When
I’ve got as far as I can, then I’ll think about telling
the police or not.”</p>

<p>“Well, thank goodness you’re not going to make a
fool of yourself to that extent,” said Alec with relief.</p>

<p>“You wait, Alexander,” Roger admonished.
“You may make a mock of me now, if you
like——”</p>

<p>“Thanks!” Alec put in gratefully.</p>

<p>“—but if my luck holds, I’m going to make you
sit up and take notice.”</p>

<p>“Then perhaps you’ll begin by explaining how
this excellent murderer of yours managed to get
away from the room and leave everything locked
on the inside behind him,” said Alec sarcastically.
“He didn’t happen to be a magician in a small
way, did he? Then you could let him out through
the key-hole, you know.”</p>

<p>Roger shook his head sadly. “My dear but
simple-minded Alexander, I can give you a
perfectly reasonable explanation of how that murder
might have been committed last night, and yet
leave all these doors and windows of yours securely
fastened on the inside this morning.”</p>

<p>“Oh, you can, can you?” said Alec derisively.
“Well, let’s have it.”</p>

<p>“Certainly. The murderer was still inside when
we broke in, concealed somewhere where nobody
thought of looking.”</p>

<p>Alec started. “Good Lord!” he exclaimed. “Of
course we never searched the place. So you think
he was really there the whole time?”</p>

<p>“On the contrary,” Roger smiled gently, “I
know he wasn’t, for the simple reason that there
was no place for him to hide in. But you asked for
an explanation, and I gave you one.”</p>

<p>Alec snorted again, but with rather less
confidence this time. Roger’s glib smoothing away of
the impossible had been a little unexpected. He
tried a new tack.</p>

<p>“Well, what about motive?” he asked. “You
can’t have a murder without motive, you know.
What on earth could have been the motive for
murdering poor old Stanworth?”</p>

<p>“Robbery!” returned Roger promptly. “That’s
one of the things that put me on the idea of murder.
That safe’s been opened, or I’m a Dutchman.
You remember what I said about the keys. I
shouldn’t be surprised if Stanworth kept a large
sum of money and other negotiable valuables in
there. That’s what the murderer was after. And
so you’ll see, when the safe is opened this
afternoon.”</p>

<p>Alec grunted. It was clear that, if not convinced,
he was at any rate impressed. Roger was so
specious and so obviously sure himself of being on
the right track, that even a greater sceptic than
Alec might have been forgiven for beginning to
doubt the meaning of apparently plain facts.</p>

<p>“Hullo!” said Roger suddenly. “Isn’t that the
lunch bell? We’d better nip in and wash. Not a
word of this to anyone, of course.”</p>

<p>They rose and began to saunter towards the
house. Suddenly Alec stopped and smote his
companion on the shoulder.</p>

<p>“Idiots!” he exclaimed. “Both of us! We’d
forgotten all about the confession. At any rate,
you can’t get away from that.”</p>

<p>“Ah, yes,” said Roger thoughtfully. “There’s
that confession, isn’t there? But no; I hadn’t
forgotten that by any means, Alexander.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch09">

<h2>CHAPTER IX. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Sees Visions</h2>

<p>They entered the house by the front door, which
always stood open whenever a party was in
progress. The unspoken thought was in the minds of
both that they preferred not to pass through the
library. Alec hurried upstairs at once. Roger,
noticing that the butler was in the act of sorting
the second post and arranging it upon the hall
table, lingered to see if there was a letter for him.</p>

<p>The butler, observing his action, shook his head.
“Nothing for you, sir. Very small post, indeed.”
He glanced through the letters he still held in his
hand. “Major Jefferson, Miss Shannon, Mrs.
Plant. No, sir. Nothing else.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Graves,” said Roger, and followed
in Alec’s wake.</p>

<p>Lunch was a silent meal, and the atmosphere
was not a little constrained. Nobody liked to
mention the subject which was uppermost in the minds
of all; and to speak of anything else seemed out of
place. What little conversation there was
concerned only the questions of packing and trains.
Mrs. Plant, who appeared a little late for the meal
but seemed altogether to have regained her mental
poise after her strange behaviour in the morning,
was to leave a little after five. This would give
her time, she explained, to wait for the safe to be
opened so that she could recover her jewels. Roger,
pondering furiously over the matter-of-fact air with
which she made this statement and trying to
reconcile it with the conclusions at which he had already
arrived regarding her, was forced to admit himself
completely at sea again, in this respect at any
rate.</p>

<p>And this was not the only thing that perplexed
him. Major Jefferson, who had appeared during
the earlier part of the morning subdued to the point
of gloominess, now wore an air of quiet satisfaction
which Roger found extremely difficult to explain.
Assuming that Jefferson had been extremely
anxious that the police should not be the first
persons to open the safe—and that was the only
conclusion which Roger could draw from what had
already transpired—what could have occurred in the
meantime to have raised his spirits to this extent?
Visions of duplicate keys and opportunities in the
empty library which he himself ought to have been
on hand to prevent, flashed, in rapid succession,
across Roger’s mind. Yet the only possible time in
which he had not been either inside the library or
overlooking it were the very few minutes while he
was washing his hands upstairs before lunch; and
it seemed hardly probable that Jefferson would
have had the nerve to utilise them in order to carry
out what was in effect a minor burglary, and that
with the possibility of being interrupted at any
minute. It is true that he had come in very late for
lunch (several minutes after Mrs. Plant, in fact);
but Roger could not think this theory in the least
degree probable.</p>

<p>Yet the remarkable fact remained that the two
persons who appeared to have been most concerned
about the safe and its puzzling contents were now
not only not in the least concerned at the prospect
of its immediate official opening, but actually
quietly jubilant. Or so, at any rate, it seemed to the
baffled Roger. Taking it all round, Roger was not
sorry that lunch was such a quiet meal. He found
that he had quite a lot of thinking to do.</p>

<p>In this respect he was no less busy when lunch
was over. Alec disappeared directly after the meal,
and as Barbara disappeared at the same time,
Roger was glad to find one problem at least that did
not seem to be beyond the scope of his deductive
powers. He solved it with some satisfaction and,
by looking at his watch, was able to arrive at the
conclusion that he would have at least half an hour
to himself before his fellow-sleuth would be ready
for the trail again. Somewhat thankfully he betook
himself to the friendly cedar once more, and lit his
pipe preparatory to embarking upon the most
concentrated spell of hard thinking he had ever
faced in his life.</p>

<p>For in spite of the confidence he had shown to
Alec, Roger was in reality groping entirely in the
dark. The suggestion of murder, which he had
advanced with such assurance, had appeared to
him at the time not a little far-fetched; and the
fact that he had put it forward at all was due as
much as anything to the overwhelming desire to
startle the stolid Alec out of some of his
complacency. Several times Roger had found himself
on the verge of becoming really exasperated with
Alec that morning. He was not usually so slow in
the uptake, almost dull, as he had been in this
affair; yet just now, when Roger was secretly not
a little pleased with himself, all he had done was
to throw cold water upon everything. It was a
useful check to his own exuberance, no doubt; but
Roger could wish that his audience, limited by
necessity to so small a number, had been a
somewhat more appreciative one.</p>

<p>His thoughts returned to the question of murder.
Was it so far-fetched, after all? He had been
faintly suspicious even before his discovery of the
broken vase and that mysterious second shot. Now
he was very much more so. Only suspicious, it
is true; there was no room as yet for conviction.
But suspicion was very strong.</p>

<p>He tried to picture the scene that might have
taken place in the library. Old Stanworth, sitting
at his table with, possibly, the French windows
open, suddenly surprised by the entrance of some
unexpected visitor. The visitor either demands
money or attacks at once. Stanworth whips a
revolver out of the drawer at his side and fires,
missing the intruder but hitting the vase. And
then—what?</p>

<p>Presumably the two would close then and fight
it out in silence. But there had been no signs of a
struggle when they broke in, nothing but that still
figure lying so calmly in his chair. Still, did that
matter very much? If the unknown could collect
those fragments of vase so carefully in order to
conceal any trace of his presence, he could
presumably clear away any evidence of a struggle.
But before that there was that blank wall to be
surmounted—how did the struggle end?</p>

<p>Roger closed his eyes and gave his imagination
full rein. He saw Stanworth, the revolver still in
his hand, swaying backwards and forwards in the
grip of his adversary. He saw the latter (a big
powerful man, as he pictured him) clasp
Stanworth’s wrist to prevent him pointing the revolver
at himself. There had been a scratch on the dead
man’s wrist, now he came to think of it; could this
be how he had acquired it? He saw the intruder’s
other hand dart to his pocket and pull out his own
revolver. And then——!</p>

<p>Roger slapped his knee in his excitement. Then,
of course, the unknown had simply clapped his
revolver to Stanworth’s forehead and pulled the
trigger!</p>

<p>He leant back in his chair and smoked furiously.
Yes, if there had been a murder, that must have
been how it was committed. And that accounted for
three, at any rate, of the puzzling circumstances—the
place of the wound, the fact that only one
empty shell had been found in Stanworth’s revolver
although two shots had been fired that night, and
the fact of the dead man’s grip upon the revolver
being properly adjusted. It was only conjecture,
of course, but it seemed remarkably convincing
conjecture.</p>

<p>Yet was it not more than counterbalanced by the
facts that still remained? That the windows and
door could be fastened, as they certainly had been,
appeared to argue irresistibly that the midnight
visitor had left the library while Mr. Stanworth
was still alive. The confession, signed with his own
hand, pointed equally positively to suicide. Could
there be any way of explaining these two things
so as to bring them into line with the rest? If not,
this brilliant theorising must fall to the ground.</p>

<p>Shelving the problem of the visitor’s exit for the
time being, Roger began to puzzle over that
laconically worded document.</p>

<p>During the next quarter of an hour Roger himself
might have presented a problem to an acute
observer, had there been one about, which, though
not very difficult of solution, was nevertheless not
entirely without interest. To smoke furiously, with
one’s pipe in full blast, betokens no small a degree
of mental excitement; to sit like a stone image and
allow that same pipe to go out in one’s mouth is
evidence of still greater prepossession; but what
are we to say of a man who, after passing through
these successive stages, smokes away equally
furiously at a perfectly cold pipe under the obvious
impression that it is in as full blast as before?
And that is what Roger was doing for fully three
minutes before he finally jumped suddenly to his
feet and hurried off once again to that happy
hunting ground of his, the library.</p>

<p>There Alec found him twenty minutes later,
when the car had departed irrevocably for the
station. A decidedly more cheerful Alec than that of
the morning, one might note in passing; and not
looking in the least like a young man who has just
parted with his lady for a whole month. It is a
reasonable assumption that Alec had not been
wasting the last half hour.</p>

<p>“Still at it?” he grinned from the doorway.
“I had a sort of idea I should find you here.”</p>

<p>Roger was a-quiver with excitement. He
scrambled up from his knees beside the waste-paper
basket, into which he had been peering, and
flourished a piece of paper in the other’s face.</p>

<p>“I’m on the track!” he exclaimed. “I’m on
the track, Alexander, in spite of your miserable
sneers. Nobody around, is there?”</p>

<p>Alec shook his head. “Well? What have you
discovered now?” he asked tolerantly.</p>

<p>Roger gripped his arm and drew him towards
the writing table. With an eager finger he stubbed
at the blotter.</p>

<p>“See that?” he demanded.</p>

<p>Alec bent and scrutinised the blotter attentively.
Just in front of Roger’s finger were a number of
short lines not more than an inch or so long. The
ones at the left-hand end were little more than
scratches on the surface, not inked at all; those
in the middle bore faint traces of ink; while towards
the right end the ink was bold and the lines thick
and decided. Beyond these were a few circular
blots of ink. Apart from these markings, the sheet
of white blotting paper, clearly fresh within the
last day or two, had scarcely been used.</p>

<p>“Well?” said Roger triumphantly. “Make
anything of it?”</p>

<p>“Nothing in particular,” Alec confessed,
straightening up again. “I should say that
somebody had been cleaning his pen on it.”</p>

<p>“In that case,” Roger returned with
complacency, “it would become my painful duty to
inform you that you were completely wrong.”</p>

<p>“Why? I don’t see it.”</p>

<p>“Then look again. If he had been cleaning his
pen, Alexander Watson, the change from ink to the
lack of it would surely be from left to right,
wouldn’t it? Not from right to left?”</p>

<p>“Would it? He might have moved from right
to left.”</p>

<p>“It isn’t natural. Besides, look at these little
strokes. Nearly all of them have a slight curve
in the tail towards the right. That means they
must have been made from left to right. Guess
again.”</p>

<p>“Oh, well, let’s try the reverse,” said Alec,
nettled into irony. “He wasn’t cleaning his pen at
all; he was dirtying it.”</p>

<p>“Meaning that he had dipped it in the ink and
was just trying it out? Nearer. But take another
look, especially at this left-hand end. Don’t you
see where the nib has split in the centre to make
these two parallel furrows? Well, just observe not
only how far apart those furrows are, but also the
fact that, though pretty deep, there isn’t a sign of a
scratch. Now, then, what does all that tell you?
There’s only one sort of pen that could have made
those marks, and the answer to that tells you what
the marks are.”</p>

<p>Alec pondered dutifully. “A fountain pen!
And he was trying to make it write.”</p>

<p>“Wonderful! Alec, I can see you’re going to be
a tremendous help in this little game.”</p>

<p>“Well, I don’t see anything to make such a fuss
about, even if they were made by a fountain pen.
I mean, it doesn’t seem to take us any forrader.”</p>

<p>“Oh, doesn’t it?” Roger had an excellent though
somewhat irritating sense of the dramatic. He
paused impressively.</p>

<p>“Well?” asked Alec impatiently. “You’ve
got something up your sleeve, I know, and you’re
aching to get it out. Let’s have it. What do these
wonderful marks of yours show you?”</p>

<p>“Simply that the confession is a fake,” retorted
Roger happily. “And now let’s go out in the
garden.”</p>

<p>He turned on his heel and walked rapidly out on
to the sun-drenched lawn. One must admit that
Roger had his annoying moments.</p>

<p>The justly exasperated Alec trotted after him.
“Talk about Sherlock Holmes!” he growled, as he
caught him up. “You’re every bit as maddening
yourself. Why can’t you tell me all about it straight
out if you really have discovered something,
instead of beating about the bush like this?”</p>

<p>“But I have told you, Alexander,” said Roger,
with an air of bland innocence. “That confession
is a fake.”</p>

<p>“But <em>why</em>?”</p>

<p>Roger hooked his arm through that of the other
and piloted him in the direction of the rose
garden.</p>

<p>“I want to stick around here,” he explained,
“so as to see the inspector when he comes up the
drive. I’m not going to miss the opening of that
safe for anything.”</p>

<p>“Why do you think that confession’s a fake?”
repeated Alec doggedly.</p>

<p>“That’s better, Alexander,” commented Roger
approvingly. “You seem to be showing a little
interest in my discoveries at last. You haven’t
been at all a good Watson up to now, you know.
It’s your business to be thrilled to the core
whenever I announce a farther step forward. You’re a
rotten thriller, Alec.”</p>

<p>A slight smile appeared on Alec’s face. “You
do all the thrilling needed yourself, I fancy.
Besides, old Holmes went a bit slower than you. He
didn’t jump to conclusions all in a minute, and I
doubt if ever he was as darned pleased with
himself all the time as you are.”</p>

<p>“Don’t be harsh with me, Alec,” Roger
murmured.</p>

<p>“I admit you haven’t done so badly so far,”
Alec pursued candidly; “though when all’s said
and done most of it’s guesswork. But if I grovelled
in front of you, as you seem to want, and kept
telling you what a dashed fine fellow you are, you’d
probably have arrested Jefferson and Mrs. Plant by
this time, and had Lady Stanworth committed for
contempt of court or something.” He paused and
considered. “In fact, what you want, old son,”
he concluded weightily, “is a brake, not a blessed
accelerator.”</p>

<p>“I’m sorry,” Roger said with humility. “I’ll
remember in future. But if you won’t compliment
me, at least let me compliment you. You’re a jolly
good brake.”</p>

<p>“And after that, Detective Sheringham, perhaps
you’ll kindly tell me how you deduce that the
confession is a fake from the fact that old
Stanworth’s pen wouldn’t write.”</p>

<p>Roger’s air changed and his face became serious.</p>

<p>“Yes, this really is rather important. It clinches
the fact of murder, which was certainly a shot in
the dark of mine before. Here’s the thing that
gives it away.”</p>

<p>He produced from his pocket the piece of paper
which he had waved in Alec’s face in the library
and, unfolding it carefully, handed it to the other.
Alec looked at it attentively. It bore numerous
irregular folds, as if it had been considerably
crumpled, and in the centre, somewhat smudged,
were the words “Victor St——,” culminating in a
large blot. The writing was very thickly marked.
The right-hand side of the paper was spattered
with a veritable shower of blots. Beyond these
there was nothing upon its surface.</p>

<p>“Humph!” observed Alec, handing it back.
“Well, what do you make of it?”</p>

<p>“I think it’s pretty simple,” Roger said, folding
the paper and stowing it carefully away again.
“Stanworth had just filled his fountain pen, or it
wouldn’t work or something. You know what
one does with a fountain pen that doesn’t want to
write. Make scratches on the nearest piece of paper,
and as soon as the ink begins to flow——”</p>

<p>“Sign one’s name!” Alec broke in, with the
nearest approach to excitement that he had yet
shown.</p>

<p>“Precisely! On the blotting pad are the
preliminary scratches to bring the ink down the pen.
What happens in nine cases out of ten after that?
The ink flows too freely and the pen floods. This
bit of paper shows that it happened in this case,
too. Stanworth was rather an impatient sort of man,
don’t you think?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose he was. Fairly.”</p>

<p>“Well, the scene’s easy enough to reconstruct.
He tries the pen out on the blotting pad. As soon
as it begins to write he grabs a sheet from the top
of that pile of fellow-sheets on his desk (did you
notice them, by the way?) and signs his name.
Then the pen floods, and he shakes it violently,
crumples up the sheet of paper, throws it into the
waste-paper basket and takes another. This time
the pen, after losing so much ink in blots, is a little
faint at first; so he only gets as far as the C in
Victor before starting again, just below the last
attempt. Then at last it writes all right, and his
signature is completed, with the usual flourish.
He picks up the piece of paper, crumples it slightly,
but not so violently as before, and throws it also
into the waste-paper basket. How’s that?”</p>

<p>“That all seems feasible enough. What next?”</p>

<p>“Why, the murderer, setting the room to rights
afterwards, thinks he’d better have a look in the
basket. The first thing he spots is that piece of
paper. ‘Aha!’ he thinks. ‘The very thing I wanted
to put a finishing touch to the affair!’ Smoothes
it carefully out, puts it in the typewriter and types
those few words above the signature. What could
be simpler?”</p>

<p>“By Jove, I wonder! It’s jolly ingenious.”</p>

<p>Roger’s eyes were sparkling. “Ingenious? Yes;
but in its very simplicity. Oh, that’s what
happened, sure enough. There’s plenty of corroboration,
when you come to think of it. The way the whole
thing’s got into the top half of the sheet of paper,
for instance. That isn’t natural, really, is it? It
ought to be in the middle, with the signature
about two thirds down. And why isn’t it? Because
the signature was in the middle already, and the
fellow had to work upwards from that.”</p>

<p>“I believe you must be right,” Alec said slowly.</p>

<p>“Well, don’t be so grudging about it. Of course
I’m right! As a matter of fact, those scratches on
the blotting paper gave me the idea as soon as I
saw them. I’d been puzzling after a way of getting
round that confession. But when I found that
second sheet in the waste-paper basket of course
the thing was as plain as a pikestaff. That was a
bad blunder of his, by the way; not to look through
the rest of the basket’s contents.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Alec agreed seriously. “And supposing
the inspector had found it. It might have given
him something to think about, mightn’t it?”</p>

<p>“It might and it mightn’t. Of course from the
inspector’s point of view there’s been nothing to
afford the least question as to the plain fact of
suicide; except the absence of motive, of course,
and that’s really nothing, after all. He hasn’t had
his suspicions aroused more or less by accident, as
it were, like we have.”</p>

<p>“We’ve had the luck, all right,” Alec remarked,
possibly in his rôle of brake.</p>

<p>“Undoubtedly, but we haven’t let it lie about
untouched,” Roger said complacently. “In fact,
I think we’ve done very well indeed up to now,”
he added candidly. “I don’t see how we could
have done more, do you?”</p>

<p>“No, I’m dashed if I do,” said Alec with
decision.</p>

<p>“But there’s one thing needed to round it off
nicely.”</p>

<p>“Oh? What’s that?”</p>

<p>“To find the murderer,” Roger replied calmly.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch10">

<h2>CHAPTER X. <br/> Mrs. Plant is Apprehensive</h2>

<p>“Great Scott!” Alec exclaimed, considerably
startled. “Find the murderer?”</p>

<p>Roger seemed pleased with the impression he
had made. “Naturally. What else? It’s the logical
sequel to what we’ve already done, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose so,” Alec hesitated, “if you put
it like that. But—— Well, we seem to be getting
on so jolly fast. I mean, it’s rather difficult to
realise that a murder’s been committed at all. It
all seems so impossible, you know.”</p>

<p>“That’s simply because it’s something foreign
to your usual experience of life,” Roger said
thoughtfully. “I admit that it is a bit of a shock at
first to face the fact that Stanworth was murdered
instead of committing suicide. But that’s not
because there’s anything inherently improbable
about murder itself. Murder’s a common enough
event if it comes to that. But it doesn’t generally
take place among the circle of one’s immediate
friends; that’s the trouble. Anyhow, there’s no
getting over it in this case. If ever a man was
murdered, Stanworth was. And very cleverly
murdered, too. I tell you, Alec, it’s no ordinary
criminal we’re after. It’s an extraordinarily cool,
brainy, and calculating sort of person indeed.”</p>

<p>“Calculating?” Alec repeated. “Then do you
think it was premeditated?”</p>

<p>“Impossible to say, as yet. But I should
certainly imagine so. It looks as if it had been very
carefully thought out beforehand, doesn’t it?”</p>

<p>“There doesn’t seem to have been much left to
chance,” Alec agreed.</p>

<p>“And look at the deliberation of the fellow.
Fancy stopping to collect those bits of vase and
cover up the traces of that second shot like that!
He must have some nerve. Yes, it certainly looks
more and more as if it was a prearranged thing.
I don’t say for last night in particular; that may
only have been a favourable opportunity which the
chap was quick to seize. But I do think that he’d
made up his mind to kill Stanworth some time or
other.”</p>

<p>“You think it was somebody Stanworth knew,
then?”</p>

<p>“Oh, there’s not much doubt about that. And
somebody he was vastly afraid of, too, I should
imagine. Why else should he keep a revolver so
handy, if he wasn’t expecting something of the
kind? Yes, that’s the line we ought to go on—see
if we can discover whether there was anybody
among his acquaintances of whom Stanworth was
thoroughly frightened. If we can only find that
out, and the name of the person as well, the odds
are ten to one that we shall have solved the
mystery of the murderer’s identity.”</p>

<p>“That sounds reasonable enough,” said Alec
with interest. “Got any theory of how it was
done?”</p>

<p>Roger beamed. “I believe I can tell you exactly
how it was done,” he said, not without pride.
“Listen!”</p>

<p>He recounted at some length the results of his
after-lunch meditations and explained the reasons
upon which his conclusions had been based. It
took the two of them several circuits of the rose
garden before the recital was completed, and then
Roger turned expectantly to his companion.</p>

<p>“You see?” he concluded eagerly. “That
accounts for everything except the facts of the
confession and the murderer’s escape from the
library. Now I’ve cleared up the confession, and
we’ve only got one difficulty to get over. What
do you think of it?”</p>

<p>“Humph!” observed Alec cautiously. He
paused, and it was evident that he was thinking
deeply.</p>

<p>“Well?” asked Roger impatiently.</p>

<p>“There’s one thing I don’t quite see,” Alec
said slowly. “According to you the shot that
killed Stanworth was fired from the other man’s
revolver. Then how is it that the bullet they took
out of his head fitted the empty shell in his <em>own</em>
revolver?”</p>

<p>Roger’s face fell. “Hullo!” he exclaimed.
“That never occurred to me.”</p>

<p>“I thought it couldn’t have,” said Alec
complacently. “That rather knocks your theory on
the head, doesn’t it?”</p>

<p>“It’s one to you, Watson, certainly,” Roger
smiled a little ruefully.</p>

<p>“Ah!” observed Alec deeply. He was evidently
not going to spoil the impression he had just made
by any rash remarks. Alec was one of those
fortunate people who know just when to stop.</p>

<p>“Still, after all,” Roger said slowly, “that’s
only a matter of detail, isn’t it? My version of
how it happened may be quite wrong. But that
doesn’t affect the main issue, which is that
it <em>was</em> done.”</p>

<p>“In other words, the fact of murder is definitely
established, you think, although you don’t know
how it was carried out?” Alec asked thoughtfully.</p>

<p>“Precisely.”</p>

<p>“Humph! And do you still think the motive
was robbery?”</p>

<p>“I do. And—— By Jove!” Roger stopped
suddenly in his stride and turned exultantly to his
companion. “That may account for Mrs. Plant,
too!”</p>

<p>“What about Mrs. Plant?”</p>

<p>“Well, didn’t you notice her at lunch? She was
as cheerful and unconcerned as anything. Rather
a change from the very perturbed person we
surprised at the safe this morning, wasn’t it? And
on the face of it you’d have expected her to be still
more worried, with the prospect of the opening
of the safe this afternoon and the proving of her
little story to us to be false. But was she? Not
a bit of it. She looked as if she hadn’t a trouble
in the world. You must have noticed it.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I did, now you come to mention it. I
thought she must be acting.”</p>

<p>“Mrs. Plant wasn’t acting at lunch any more
than she was telling the truth to us this morning,”
said Roger with conviction. “And why wasn’t
she? Because for some mysterious reason or other
she had no need to be. In other words, she knew
that when the safe was opened this afternoon,
everything would be all right as far as she was
concerned.”</p>

<p>“How on earth did she know that?”</p>

<p>“I wish I could tell you. But consider. If the
safe had been robbed last night, Mrs. Plant’s
jewels would have disappeared with the other
valuables, wouldn’t they? That is, assuming that they
had ever been there. Well, there’s her answer to us.
‘Oh, yes, my jewels <em>were</em> there, and that’s why I
wanted to get at the safe; but they’ve been stolen
with everything else, and that’s why they’re not
there now.’ See?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but what I want to know is, how did she
find out that the safe had been robbed and her
story to us would hold water after all?”</p>

<p>“And that’s exactly what I want to know, too,
my excellent Alec. If we only knew that, we should
have advanced a long way to the solution of the
mystery. All that we can say definitely is that,
some time between our finding her in the library
and lunch time, information must have reached
her about what happened to the safe last night.
It seems to me that Mrs. Plant is going to find
herself in a very awkward position rather soon.”</p>

<p>“But why do you think Mrs. Plant wanted to
open the safe this morning, if there’s no truth in
her tale?”</p>

<p>“Obviously there must have been something
inside that she badly wanted to get hold of. Equally
obviously she now either has got hold of it, or
knows that it’s in safe keeping. And then we get
back to Jefferson again. He’s been going through
exactly the same sequence of emotions as Mrs.
Plant. What do you make of that?”</p>

<p>“Surely you’re not suggesting that Jefferson
and Mrs. Plant are in league together, are you?”</p>

<p>“What other conclusion is there? They’re both
anxious to get something out of that safe before
the police open it, and they’re both palpably
worried to death over something. Yet at one
o’clock they’re both smiling away to themselves
as if a tremendous load had been taken off their
minds. I’m afraid that they’re not only in league
with each other, but with a mysterious third person
as well. How else can you account for their
behaviour?”</p>

<p>“Good Lord! You don’t mean that they’re
acting with—with the murderer, do you?”</p>

<p>“It looks to me uncommonly like it,” said Roger
gravely. “After all, he’s the only person, so far as
we know, who could have enlightened them about
the safe.”</p>

<p>“But it’s out of the question!” Alec burst out
impulsively. “Jefferson—I don’t know anything
about him, though I should certainly have set him
down as quite a decent fellow and a sahib, even if
he is a bit reserved. But Mrs. Plant! My dear
chap, you’re absolutely off the rails there. Of all
the obviously straightforward and honest people
in the world, I should have said that Mrs. Plant
was the most. Oh, you <em>must</em> be on the wrong
tack!”</p>

<p>“I only wish I were,” Roger returned seriously.
“Three hours ago I should have said that the idea
of Mrs. Plant being mixed up in a murder was not
only unthinkable, but ludicrous. I’ve always
thought her a charming woman, and, as you say,
absolutely sincere. Certainly not a happy woman
(one doesn’t know anything about that husband
of hers, by the way; he may be a bad egg); in fact,
a woman with a good deal of sorrow in her life, I
should say. But absolutely as straight as a die.
Yet what can one think now? Facts speak louder
than opinions. And the facts are only too plain.”</p>

<p>“I don’t care,” said Alec obstinately. “If
you’re trying to mix Mrs. Plant up in this affair,
you’re making a hopeless mistake, Roger. That’s
all I’ve got to say.”</p>

<p>“I hope you’re right, Alec,” Roger said dryly.
“By the way, I think I want to have a word with
the lady. Oh, I’m not going to tax her with the
murder or anything,” he added with a smile,
observing the look on Alec’s face. “But I think she
said at lunch that she was expecting to leave here
this afternoon. Of course that’s out of the question.
She was the last person to see Stanworth alive, and
she’ll be wanted to give evidence at the inquest.
The inspector must have forgotten to tell her.
Let’s go and see what she’s got to say about it.”</p>

<p>Somewhat unwillingly Alec accompanied Roger
on his quest. He did not attempt to make any
secret of his distaste for this aspect of his new rôle.
To hunt down a man who deserves no mercy and
expects none is one thing; to hunt down a charming
lady is very much another.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant was sitting in a garden chair on a
shady part of the lawn. There was a book in her
lap, but she was staring abstractedly at the grass
before her and her thoughts were evidently very
far away. Hearing their footsteps she glanced up
quickly and greeted the two with her usual quiet,
rather sad smile.</p>

<p>“Have you come to tell me that Inspector
Mansfield has arrived?” she asked, perfectly
naturally.</p>

<p>Roger threw himself casually on the ground
just in front of her.</p>

<p>“No, he hasn’t come yet,” he replied easily.
“Very hot out here, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>“I suppose it is. But the heat doesn’t worry
me, I’m glad to say. I had enough of it in the
Soudan to inure me to anything that this country
can produce.”</p>

<p>“You’re lucky then. Alec, why on earth don’t
you lie down and be comfortable? Never stand
up when you can sit down instead. By the way,
Mrs. Plant, I suppose you’ll be staying over for the
inquest to-morrow, won’t you?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no. I shall be off this afternoon, Mr.
Sheringham.”</p>

<p>Roger glanced up. “But surely you’ll be wanted
to give evidence? You were the last person to see
him alive, weren’t you? In the hall, you know?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I—I don’t think I shall be needed, shall
I?” Mrs. Plant asked apprehensively, paling
slightly. “The inspector didn’t—he didn’t say
anything about it.”</p>

<p>“Perhaps he didn’t know then that you were the
last person,” said Roger carelessly, but watching
her narrowly. “And afterwards he must have
forgotten to warn you; or else he was intending
to do so this afternoon. But they’re certain to
need you, you know.”</p>

<p>It was very clear that this piece of news was
highly unwelcome. Mrs. Plant’s hand was
trembling in her lap, and she was biting her lip in an
effort to retain her self-control.</p>

<p>“Do you really think so?” she asked, in a voice
that she strove desperately to render unconcerned.
“But I haven’t got anything of—of any importance
to tell, you know.”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, of course not,” Roger said reassuringly.
“It’s only a matter of form, you know. You’ll
just have to repeat what you told the inspector this
morning.”</p>

<p>“Will they—— Are they likely to ask me any
questions, Mr. Sheringham?” Mrs. Plant asked,
with a little laugh.</p>

<p>“Oh, they may ask you one or two, perhaps.
Nothing very dreadful.”</p>

<p>“I see. What sort of questions, would you
imagine?”</p>

<p>“About Mr. Stanworth’s manner, probably.
Whether he was cheerful, and all that. And of
course they’ll want to know what he spoke to you
about.”</p>

<p>“Oh, that was nothing,” Mrs. Plant replied
quickly. “Just about—— Oh, nothing of any
importance whatever. Er—you will be giving
evidence, too, won’t you, Mr. Sheringham?”</p>

<p>“Yes, unfortunately.”</p>

<p>Only the white knuckles of her clenched hand
gave any hint of Mrs. Plant’s feelings as she asked
lightly enough, “And you’re not going to give me
away over that absurd panic of mine about my
jewels this morning, are you? You promised,
didn’t you?”</p>

<p>“Of course not!” said Roger easily. “Wouldn’t
dream of it!”</p>

<p>“Not even if they ask you?” Mrs. Plant
persisted, with a nervous little laugh.</p>

<p>“How could they ask me?” Roger smiled.
“Nobody knows anything about it except us three.
Besides, I shouldn’t think of giving you away.”</p>

<p>“Nor you, Mr. Grierson?” she asked, turning to
Alec.</p>

<p>Alec flushed slightly. “Naturally not,” he said
awkwardly.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant fumbled with the handkerchief in her
hand and surreptitiously wiped her mouth.</p>

<p>“Thank you so much, both of you,” she said in a
low voice.</p>

<p>Roger jumped suddenly to his feet.</p>

<p>“Hullo!” he exclaimed, putting an end to a
difficult pause. “Isn’t that the inspector just
going up to the front door? Let’s go in and watch
the safe being opened, shall we?”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch11">

<h2>CHAPTER XI. <br/> Lady Stanworth Exchanges Glances</h2>

<p>Leaving Alec to accompany Mrs. Plant to the
house, Roger hurried on ahead with a muttered
excuse. He was anxious not to miss a moment of the
highly significant scene which was about to take
place. As he reached the hall, Jefferson was in the
act of greeting the perspiring inspector.</p>

<p>“I’m sorry you have had all this trouble,
Inspector,” he was saying. “It’s too bad on a day
like this.”</p>

<p>“It is a bit warm, sir,” the inspector admitted,
mopping vigorously.</p>

<p>“I should have thought they might have
provided you with a car or something. Hullo,
Sheringham. Come to see the safe opened?”</p>

<p>“If the inspector has no objections,” Roger
said.</p>

<p>“Me, sir? Not in the least. In fact, I think
everybody concerned ought to be present. Not
that I really expect to find anything particularly
important, but you never know, do you?”</p>

<p>“Never,” said Roger gravely.</p>

<p>“Well, Lady Stanworth will be down in a
minute, no doubt,” Jefferson remarked; “and then we
can see to it. You had no difficulty in getting the
combination, Inspector?”</p>

<p>“None at all, sir. It was only a question of
ringing up the makers. Whew! It <em>is</em> hot!”</p>

<p>Roger had been watching Jefferson carefully.
There was no doubt that, whatever his feelings
about the opening of the safe had been in the
morning, he was now quite unperturbed. Roger was
more convinced than ever that something of the
first importance must have occurred to effect this
radical change.</p>

<p>A slow tread overhead caused him to look up.
Lady Stanworth was descending the stairs.</p>

<p>“Ah, here is Lady Stanworth,” the inspector
observed, with a slight bow.</p>

<p>Lady Stanworth inclined her head coldly. “You
wish me to be present at this formality, Inspector?”
she asked distantly.</p>

<p>The inspector looked slightly taken aback.</p>

<p>“Well, I think it would be better, my lady,”
he replied, a trifle deprecatingly. “As the only
surviving relative of the deceased’s, you know.
But of course if you have any——”</p>

<p>“I was not a relative of Mr. Stanworth’s,” Lady
Stanworth interrupted in the same tone. “I
thought I had made that clear to you this morning.
He was my brother-in-law.”</p>

<p>“Quite so, quite so,” said the inspector
apologetically. “I should perhaps have said <em>connection</em>.
It is usual for the nearest connection to be present
when——”</p>

<p>“I ought to have warned you, perhaps, Lady
Stanworth,” Jefferson put in evenly. “But,
unfortunately, I have not seen you to do so since
before lunch; and I did not care to take the
responsibility of disturbing you. The opening of the safe is,
after all, a mere formality; and both the inspector
and myself have no doubt that nothing of any
importance will be found. Nothing whatever.”</p>

<p>Lady Stanworth looked hard at the last speaker
for a moment, and when she spoke again the
former coldness of her tone had completely
disappeared.</p>

<p>“Of course I will come if you think it better,
Inspector,” she said graciously. “There is really no
reason whatever why I should not do so.” And
without more ado she led the way towards the library.</p>

<p>Roger brought up the rear of the little party.
He was thinking furiously. He had watched the
little exchange that had just taken place with
feelings almost of bewilderment. It was so unlike
Lady Stanworth to go out of her way to snub the
poor inspector in that highly unnecessary manner.
Why had she done so? And why had she been so
very much on the high horse with regard to the
opening of the safe? It seemed almost as if she had
been really apprehensive of something, and had
adopted this attitude in order to cloak her actual
feelings. But if that were the case, what earthly
reason could she have for apprehension? Roger
asked himself despairingly.</p>

<p>Yet her sudden change of manner was no less
remarkable. As soon as Jefferson had spoken,
she had become as gracious as ever and all
objections had been abruptly dropped. What was it
Jefferson had said? Something about nothing of
importance being found in the safe. Ah, yes.
“Both the inspector and myself have no doubt that
nothing of importance will be found.” And myself!
Now he came to think of it, Jefferson had certainly
stressed those two words a little. Could it be that
he had conveyed some kind of warning to her?
Information of some sort? And if so, what?
Obviously the same information that he and Mrs.
Plant had received during the morning. Was it
possible then that Lady Stanworth herself could
be in league with Mrs. Plant and Jefferson? Surely
this was making things altogether too complicated.
Yet he could take his oath that <em>something</em> had
passed between those two before Lady Stanworth
finally descended the last few stairs so amicably.</p>

<p>Thus the gist of the thoughts that whirled
confusedly through Roger’s brain during the few
seconds occupied by the journey to the library.
As he passed the threshold he raised his eyebrows
in mock despair and, shelving this fresh problem
for the time being, prepared to give all his
attention to present events.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant and Alec were already in the library;
the former perfectly cool and collected, the latter,
to Roger’s eyes at any rate, somewhat ill at ease.
It was clear, Roger reflected, with some uneasiness,
that Alec did not at all like the highly ambiguous
position in which he stood with regard to that lady.
What would he say when he heard the possibility
that his hostess also might not be unconcerned
with this dark and mysterious business? It would
be just like Alec to throw up the whole affair and
insist on all cards being laid upon the table; and
that would have broken Roger’s heart just at the
moment.</p>

<p>Inspector Mansfield was regrettably lacking in
an appreciation of dramatic effects. He did not
gaze around him from beneath lowered brows. He
did not mutter to himself so that everyone could
strain forward to catch his ominous words. He did
not even make a speech.</p>

<p>All he did was to observe cheerfully, “Well, let’s
get this business over,” and casually open the safe.
He could not have made less fuss had it been a tin
of sardines.</p>

<p>But in spite of the inspector’s lamentable
behaviour, drama was not altogether lacking. As
the heavy door swung open, there was an
involuntary catching of breath and heads were craned
anxiously forward. Roger, watching the faces of the
others instead of the centre of attraction, noted
quickly that a flicker of anxiety flashed across the
countenances of both Mrs. Plant and Jefferson.
“Neither of ’em have seen inside, then,” he
thought. “Their information came from a third
person. That’s certain, anyway.”</p>

<p>But it was Lady Stanworth who held his
attention most closely. Thinking herself unobserved for
the moment, she had not troubled to hide her
feelings. She was standing a little behind the
others, peering between their heads. Her breath
was coming quickly, and her bosom rising and
falling almost tumultuously; her face was quite white.
For a few seconds Roger thought she was going
to faint. Then, as if she was reassured, the colour
came back into her face and she sighed ever so softly.</p>

<p>“Well, Inspector?” she asked in normal tones.
“What is there?”</p>

<p>The inspector was rapidly scrutinising the
contents.</p>

<p>“As I expected,” he replied, a trifle disappointedly.
“Nothing of any importance as far as I’m
concerned, my lady.” He glanced quickly through a
bundle of papers that he held in his hands. “Share
certificates; business documents; contracts; more
share certificates.”</p>

<p>He replaced the bundle in the safe and took out a
cash-box.</p>

<p>“Whew!” he whistled softly, as he opened it.
“Mr. Stanworth kept plenty of ready money on
hand, didn’t he?”</p>

<p>Roger pricked up his ears and followed the
direction of the inspector’s gaze. Lying loosely
at the bottom of the cash-box was a thick wad of
banknotes. The inspector picked it out and flicked
them over.</p>

<p>“Upwards of four thousand pounds, I should
say,” he remarked with fitting awe. “That doesn’t
look as if he was in financial difficulties, does it?”</p>

<p>“I told you I thought it most unlikely,”
Jefferson said shortly.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant stooped and looked into the safe.</p>

<p>“Oh, there’s my jewel-box,” she said, in tones
of relief. “On the bottom shelf.”</p>

<p>The inspector bent down and extracted a small
case of green leather. “This, madam?” he asked.
“You said this is yours?”</p>

<p>“Yes. I gave them to him to lock up for me
yesterday morning. I never like to leave them
lying about in my room if I can help it, you
know.”</p>

<p>The inspector pressed the catch and the lid of
the case flew open. A necklace, a bracelet or two,
and a few rings were visible inside; pleasant little
trinkets, but not of any remarkable value.</p>

<p>Roger exchanged glances with Alec. In the eyes
of the latter there was a scarcely concealed derision
which Roger found peculiarly difficult to bear in
silence. If ever a look said, “I told you so!” Alec’s
did at that moment.</p>

<p>“I suppose Lady Stanworth can identify these
as yours, madam,” the inspector was saying.
“Purely as a matter of form,” he added, half
apologetically.</p>

<p>“Oh, yes,” said Mrs. Plant easily, picking the
necklace and a few other things out of the case.
“You’ve seen me wearing these, haven’t you, Lady
Stanworth?”</p>

<p>There was a perceptible pause before Lady
Stanworth answered; and it seemed to Roger that she
was looking at Mrs. Plant in rather an odd way.
Then she said, naturally enough:</p>

<p>“Of course. And I remember the case, too. Yes,
these belong to Mrs. Plant, Inspector.”</p>

<p>“Then we may as well hand them over to her
at once,” said the inspector, and Lady Stanworth
nodded approvingly.</p>

<p>“Is that all you require, Inspector?” Jefferson
asked.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir; quite. And I’ve had my journey for
nothing, I’m afraid. Still, we have to go into
everything, as you know.”</p>

<p>“Oh, naturally,” Jefferson murmured, turning
away from the safe.</p>

<p>“And now I must get back and finish my
report,” the inspector continued. “The coroner will
communicate with you this afternoon as soon as
I’ve seen him again.”</p>

<p>“Oh, by the way, Inspector,” Mrs. Plant put in,
“Mr. Sheringham was telling me that I might be
wanted to attend the inquest. Is that necessary?”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid so, madam. You were the last
person to see Mr. Stanworth alive.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but my—my evidence wouldn’t be of the
least importance, would it? The few words I had
with him about those roses can’t throw any light
on the matter at all.”</p>

<p>“I’m very sorry, madam,” the inspector
murmured, “but in these cases the last person to see
the deceased alive is invariably called, whether
the evidence appears to be of any importance or
not.”</p>

<p>“Oh! Then I must take it as quite certain that
I shall have to attend?” Mrs. Plant asked
disappointedly.</p>

<p>“Quite, madam,” the inspector returned firmly,
moving towards the door.</p>

<p>Roger hooked his arm through that of Alec and
drew him out through the French windows.</p>

<p>“Well?” asked the latter with an undisguised
grin. “Still as sure as ever that those jewels
weren’t in the safe, Sherlock Sheringham?”</p>

<p>“Yes. I’ve been expecting a little subtle ridicule
from you, Alec,” Roger said with mock humility.
“No doubt I deserve it.”</p>

<p>“I’m glad you’re beginning to realise that,”
retorted Alec pleasantly.</p>

<p>“Yes, for drawing the only possible conclusions
from a given set of facts. Well, I suppose we shall
have to go back to the beginning again, and start
to draw some impossible ones instead.”</p>

<p>“Oh, Lord!” Alec groaned.</p>

<p>“But seriously, Alec,” said Roger with a change
of tone, “things are going very curiously. Those
jewels ought not to have been in the safe at all,
you know. Nor the money either, for that matter.
It’s all wrong.”</p>

<p>“Most annoying when things break rules like
that, isn’t it? Well, I suppose you’ll allow now that
Mrs. Plant <em>was</em> speaking the truth this morning,
after all.”</p>

<p>“I suppose I shall have to,” said Roger
reluctantly. “For the present, at any rate. But it’s
very, very extraordinary.”</p>

<p>“That Mrs. Plant should have been speaking
the truth? It seemed to me far more extraordinary
that she should have been lying, as you were so
jolly sure.”</p>

<p>“All right, Alec. Don’t get rattled. No, I wasn’t
meaning that exactly. But that she should have
been so remarkably agitated about those jewels of
hers, as if she thought that somebody was going
to steal them! And then that yarn of hers that she
thought the police would take them and she
wouldn’t get them back. No, say what you like,
Alec, it <em>is</em> extraordinary.”</p>

<p>“Women are extraordinary,” said Alec wisely.</p>

<p>“Humph! Certainly Mrs. Plant is.”</p>

<p>“Well, at any rate, she’s exonerated, I take it.”</p>

<p>“No, that she isn’t,” said Roger with decision.
“That lady isn’t free from suspicion yet by any
means. After all, the matter of the jewels is only
one of several curious circumstances. But look
here, Alec; another remarkable thing has cropped
up since I saw you last. I’m going to tell you,
because I promised I’d share anything new with
you at the very beginning. But I won’t unless
you’ll promise to take it quite calmly, and not
smite me with that great ham-fist of yours or throw
yourself despairingly into a rose bush or anything.
You know, you’re a very difficult sort of person to
work with on this sort of job, Alec.”</p>

<p>“Fire away!” Alec grunted. “What’s happened
now?”</p>

<p>“You won’t like it, but I can’t help that. After
all, I’m only telling you facts, not theories; and
there’s no getting away from them, however
unwelcome they may be. It’s about Lady Stanworth
this time. Listen.”</p>

<p>And Roger embarked upon a voluble recital of
The Strange Behaviour of Lady Stanworth.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch12">

<h2>CHAPTER XII. <br/> Hidden Chambers and What-Nots</h2>

<p>“Oh!” said Alec carefully, when Roger had
finished.</p>

<p>“You see? I carefully refrain from drawing any
deduction. Aloud, at any rate. All I say is that
it <em>looks</em> funny.”</p>

<p>“Lots of things seem to look funny to you,
Roger,” Alec remarked tolerantly.</p>

<p>“About this case?” Roger retorted. “You’re
quite right. Lots of things do. But let’s put all
these side issues behind us for the moment. There’s
one thing that I’m simply aching to set about.”</p>

<p>“Only one?” said Alec nastily. “And what’s
that?”</p>

<p>“To find out how the murderer got away from
the library last night. If we can solve that little
problem, we’ve cleared up the last remaining
difficulty as far as the committing of the murder goes.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose we have,” Alec replied
thoughtfully. “But it seems to me that we’ve rather got
our work cut out there, haven’t we? I mean, it’s
pretty well impossible for a man to get out of a
room like that and leave everything locked up
behind him, you know.”</p>

<p>“On the contrary, that’s just what it isn’t;
because he did it. And it’s up to us to find out
how.”</p>

<p>“Got any ideas about it?” Alec asked with
interest.</p>

<p>“Not a one! At least, I can think of one very
obvious way. We’ll test that first, at any rate.
The library’s empty now, and I expect Jefferson
will be pretty busy for the rest of the afternoon.
We can sleuth away in peace.”</p>

<p>They turned their steps in the direction of the
library.</p>

<p>“And what is the obvious solution to the library
mystery?” Alec asked. “I’m blessed if I can see
one.”</p>

<p>Roger looked at him curiously. “Can’t you <em>really</em>?”
he said.</p>

<p>“No, I’m dashed if I can.”</p>

<p>“Well—what about a secret door, then?”</p>

<p>“Oh!” Alec observed blankly. “Yes, I didn’t
seem to think of that.”</p>

<p>“It’s the only obvious way. And it’s not outside
the possibilities by any means in an old house like
this. Especially in the library, which hasn’t been
pulled about so much as some of the other rooms.”</p>

<p>“That’s true enough,” said Alec, quite excitedly.
“Roger, old sleuth, I really do believe you’re on
the track of something at last.”</p>

<p>“Thanks,” Roger returned dryly. “I’ve been
waiting for a remark like that for some hours.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but this really is interesting. Secret
passages and—and hidden chambers and what-nots.
Jolly romantic, and all that. I’m all in favour
of unearthing it.”</p>

<p>“Well, here we are, and the scent ought to be
strong. Let’s get down to it.”</p>

<p>“What shall we do?” asked Alec, staring
curiously round the walls as if he expected the
secret door to fly suddenly open if he looked hard
enough.</p>

<p>“Well, first of all, I think we’d better examine
this panelling. Now, let’s see; this wall where the
fireplace is backs on to the drawing room, doesn’t
it? And this one behind the safe on to the
storeroom and a little bit of the hall. So that if there
is a door or anything, the probability is that it will
be in one of those two walls; it’s not likely to be in
either of the outside ones. Well, I tell you what
we’d better do. You examine the panelling in
here, and I’ll scout round on the other side of the
walls and see if I can spot anything there.”</p>

<p>“Right-ho,” said Alec, beginning to scrutinise
the fireplace wall with great earnestness.</p>

<p>Roger made his way out into the hall and thence
to the drawing room. The dividing wall between
that room and the library was covered with paper,
and one or two china cabinets stood against it.
After a cursory peep or two behind these, Roger
mentally wrote that wall off, at any rate, as
blameless. The storeroom, similarly, was so full up with
trunks and lumber as to be out of the question.</p>

<p>Roger returned to the library, to find Alec
industriously tapping panels.</p>

<p>“I say,” said the latter, “several of these panels
sound hollow.”</p>

<p>“Well, there’s no way through either into the
drawing room or the storeroom, I’m convinced,”
Roger remarked, closing the door behind him. “So
that I don’t think it’s much use trying those walls
haphazard.”</p>

<p>Alec paused. “What about a secret chamber,
though? That wouldn’t necessarily need a way
straight through. It might come out anywhere.”</p>

<p>“I thought of that. But the walls aren’t thick
enough. They’re only about eighteen inches
through. No, let’s go and have a look at it from the
outside. There might possibly be some way into
the garden.”</p>

<p>They went out through the open windows and
contemplated the red-brick walls attentively.</p>

<p>“Doesn’t look very hopeful, does it?” said Alec.</p>

<p>“I’m afraid not,” Roger admitted. “No, I fear
that the secret-door theory falls to the ground. I
thought it would somehow.”</p>

<p>“Oh? Why?”</p>

<p>“Well, this house doesn’t belong to the
Stanworths, you see, and they’ve only been here a
month or so. I don’t suppose they’d know
anything about secret passages, even if there were
any.”</p>

<p>“No, but the other fellow might.”</p>

<p>“The murderer? It isn’t likely, is it?”</p>

<p>“I hate giving up the idea,” said Alec reluctantly.
“After all, it’s the only possible explanation of his
disappearance, as far as I can see.”</p>

<p>Roger suddenly smote his hands together. “By
Jove! There’s one hope left. Idiot not to have
thought of it before! The fireplace!”</p>

<p>“The fireplace?”</p>

<p>“Of course! That’s where most of these old
houses have their secret hiding places. It will be
there if anywhere.”</p>

<p>He hurried back into the library, Alec close at
his heels. There he stopped suddenly short.</p>

<p>“Oh, Lord, I was forgetting that the blessed
place had been bricked in so very thoroughly.” He
gazed at the modern intrusion without enthusiasm.
“That’s hopeless, I’m afraid.”</p>

<p>Alec looked thoughtfully round the room. “I
don’t think we’ve examined these walls enough,
you know,” he remarked hopefully. “There’s
plenty of scope in this panelling really.”</p>

<p>Roger shook his head. “It’s just possible, but
I’m very much afraid that——” He caught a
sudden and violent frown from Alec, and broke off
in mid-sentence. The door was opening softly.</p>

<p>The next moment Jefferson entered.</p>

<p>“Oh, hullo, you two,” he said. “I’ve been
looking for you. Can you manage to look after
yourselves for the afternoon? Lady Stanworth and
Mrs. Plant are in their rooms. Both naturally
rather upset. And I’ve got to go into the town to
see about a few things.”</p>

<p>“Oh, we’ll be all right,” Roger said easily.
“Please don’t bother about us.”</p>

<p>Jefferson glanced round.</p>

<p>“Looking for a book?” he asked.</p>

<p>“No,” said Roger quickly. “As a matter of
fact, I was studying this overmantel. I’m rather
interested in that sort of thing—carving, and
panelling, and old houses. This is really rather a
wonderful room. What’s the date, do you know?
Early Jacobean, I should say.”</p>

<p>“Somewhere about that,” Jefferson said
indifferently. “I don’t know the actual date, I’m
afraid.”</p>

<p>“Very interesting period,” Roger commented.
“And there’s usually a priest-hole or something
like that in houses built at that time. Anything of
the sort here? There ought to be, you know.”</p>

<p>“Can’t say, I’m afraid,” Jefferson replied, a little
impatiently. “Never heard of one, at any rate.
Well, I must be getting along.”</p>

<p>As the door closed behind him, Roger turned to
Alec.</p>

<p>“I didn’t expect anything, but I thought I might
as well try it. He didn’t give anything away, though,
whether he knew or not. On the whole, I should
say that he didn’t know.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>“He was far too off-hand to be lying. If he
wanted to put us off, he’d have elaborated
somewhat, I fancy. Well, if we can’t find our secret door,
we must try other means of providing an exit for
our man. That leaves us with one door and three
windows. We’ll try the door first.”</p>

<p>The door proved to be a massive piece of wood,
with a large and efficient lock. Except where the
socket in the lintel had been torn away in the
efforts to force an entrance, it was still undamaged.</p>

<p>“Well, that’s out of the question, at any rate,”
Roger said with decision. “I don’t see how
anybody could possibly have got out through that and
left it locked on the inside, with the key still in the
lock. It might have been done with a pair of pliers,
if the end of the key projected beyond the lock on
the other side. But it doesn’t; so that’s out of the
question. French windows next.”</p>

<p>These were of the ordinary pattern, with a
handle which shot a bolt simultaneously at the top and
bottom. In addition there were small brass bolts
at the bottom and top, both of which had been
fastened when the window was opened that
morning.</p>

<p>“It looks out of the question to me,” Roger
muttered. “It <em>is</em> out of the question. Even if
he had been able to turn the handle (which he
couldn’t possibly have done), he couldn’t have
shot the bolts as well.”</p>

<p>“I’m blessed if he could,” said Alec with
conviction.</p>

<p>Roger turned away.</p>

<p>“Then that leaves these two windows. I don’t
see how anyone could have left this little lattice
one closed behind him. What about the sash one?
That looks more hopeful.”</p>

<p>He climbed up on the window seat and
examined the fastening attentively.</p>

<p>“Any luck?” asked Alec.</p>

<p>Roger stepped heavily on to the floor again.
“I regret to have to confess myself baffled,” he said
disappointedly. “There’s an anti-burglar fitting
on that window which would absolutely prevent
the thing being fastened from the outside. I’m
beginning to think the fellow must have been a
wizard in a small way.”</p>

<p>“It seems to me,” said Alec weightily, “that
if the chap couldn’t have got out, as we appear
to have proved, then he could never have been in
here at all. In other words, he doesn’t exist, and
old Stanworth did commit suicide, after all.”</p>

<p>“But I tell you that Stanworth <em>can’t</em> have
committed suicide,” said Roger petulantly. “There’s
far too much evidence against it.”</p>

<p>Alec threw himself into a chair. “Is there,
though?” he asked argumentatively. “As you
put it, it’s certainly consistent with murder. But
it’s equally consistent with suicide. Aren’t you
rather losing sight of that in your anxiety to make
a murder of it? Besides, don’t forget that your
motive has fallen to the ground since the safe was
opened. There wasn’t a robbery here last night,
after all.”</p>

<p>Roger was roaming restlessly about the room.
At Alec’s last words he paused in his stride and
looked at his companion with some irritation.</p>

<p>“Oh, don’t be childish, Alec,” he said sharply.
“Money and jewels aren’t the only things that can
be robbed. The motive still holds perfectly good
if we’ve got to have a motive. It was robbery of
something else; that’s all. But why stick to
robbery? Make it revenge, hatred, self-protection,
anything you like, but take it from me that
Stanworth <em>was</em> murdered. The evidence is <em>not</em> equally
consistent with suicide. Think it over for yourself
and you’ll see; I can’t bother to go through it
all again. And if we can’t find the way the chap
got out, that’s because we’re a pair of idiots and
can’t see what must be lying under our noses, that’s
all.” And he resumed his stride again.</p>

<p>“Humph!” said Alec incredulously.</p>

<p>“Door, window, window, window,” Roger
muttered to himself. “It must be one of those four.
There’s simply no other way.”</p>

<p>He wandered impatiently from one to the other,
trying desperately to put himself in the place of the
criminal. What <em>would</em> he have done?</p>

<p>With some ceremony Alec filled and lighted his
pipe. When it was in full blast he leaned back
in his chair and allowed his eyes to rest approvingly
on the cool greens of the gardens outside.</p>

<p>“Life’s too short,” he remarked lazily. “If it
really was a clear case of murder, I’d be on the trail
as strenuously as anyone. But really, old man,
when you come to consider—calmly and sanely,
I mean—how extraordinarily little you’ve got to
go on and how you’re twisting the most ordinary
things, why I think even you will admit in a few
weeks’ time that when all’s said and done we——”</p>

<p>“Alec!”</p>

<p>Something in Roger’s tone caused Alec to turn
round in his chair and look at him. He was leaning
out of the lattice window, apparently intent on the
garden outside.</p>

<p>“Well?” said Alec tolerantly. “What is it
now?”</p>

<p>“If you come here, Alec,” said Roger, very
gently, “I’ll show you how the murderer got away
last night.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch13">

<h2>CHAPTER XIII. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Investigates a Footprint</h2>

<p>“Show me <em>what</em>?” Alec exclaimed, bounding out
of his chair.</p>

<p>“How the murderer escaped,” Roger repeated,
turning and smiling happily at his dumb-founded
accomplice. “It’s extraordinarily simple, really.
That’s why we never spotted it. Have you ever
noticed, Alec, that it’s always the simple things of
life—plans, inventions, what you like—that are
the most effective? Take, for instance——”</p>

<p>Alec seized his too voluble friend by the shoulder
and shook him violently.</p>

<p>“<em>How</em> did the chap escape?” he demanded.</p>

<p>Roger pointed to the window through which he
had been leaning.</p>

<p>“There!” he said simply.</p>

<p>“Yes, but how do you know?” cried the
exasperated Alec.</p>

<p>“Oh, is that what you meant? Come, friend
Alec.” Roger took his fellow-sleuth by the arm
and pointed triumphantly to the window-sill. On
the surface of the white paint were a few faint
scratches. “You see those? Now look at that!”
And he indicated something on the flower bed
beneath. “I said it must be lying under our noses
all the time,” he added complacently.</p>

<p>Alec leaned out of the window and looked at the
bed. Just below the window was an unmistakable
footprint, the toe pointing towards the window.</p>

<p>“You said <i>escaped</i>, didn’t you?” he asked,
withdrawing his head.</p>

<p>“I did, Alexander.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’m sorry to disappoint you and all that,”
said Alec, in a tone that curiously belied his words,
“but nobody escaped this way. Someone got in.
If you look again, carefully this time, you’ll see that
the toe is pointing towards the window; not the
heel. That means that somebody stepped from the
ground to the window-ledge, not <i lang="la">vice versa</i>.”</p>

<p>“Alec, you are on your day to-day, aren’t you?”
said Roger admiringly. “Precisely the same
thought occurred to myself at a first glance. Then,
looking carefully, as you so kindly suggest, I
noticed that the indentation of the heel is very
much deeper than that of the toe, indicating that
somebody stepped backwards from the window to
the ground, after thoughtfully closing the window
behind him. If he’d been stepping up, the toe would
be deeper than the heel, as a moment’s thought will
show you, won’t it?”</p>

<p>“Oh!” said the crestfallen Alec.</p>

<p>“Sorry to have to score off you in that blatant
Sherlockian way,” Roger continued more kindly,
“but you did ask for it, you know. No, but
seriously, Alec, this is most extraordinarily important.
It clears up the last difficulty about murder.”</p>

<p>“But how did he close the window behind him?”
asked Alec, still half incredulous.</p>

<p>“Oh! That’s the neatest thing of all. And
delightfully simple, although it took me a minute
or two to discover it after I’d seen the footprint.
Look! You see this handle, the ordinary type for
this sort of window. It consists of an arm that
fits into the lock and a heavy handle set at right
angles to it, the whole moving on a central pivot;
the weight of the handle end keeps the other end
in position. Well, watch!”</p>

<p>Carefully arranging the handle so that the heavy
end was balanced exactly above the pivot, Roger
pushed the window sharply back into its frame.
Immediately the handle was dislodged by the jar,
and, with a little click, the fastener fell into place
in its socket, the weight of the falling handle
driving it well home.</p>

<p>“Well, I’m dashed!” Alec said.</p>

<p>“Neat, isn’t it?” Roger said proudly. “He
stood on the sill outside, you see, and pulled it to
behind him, having fixed the handle in position
before he got out. I suppose it’s a trick you could
play with any lattice window, though I’ve never
come across it before.”</p>

<p>“That’s one to you, all right,” said the humbled
Alec. “I take back quite a lot of the unkind things
I’ve said to you.”</p>

<p>“Oh, don’t trouble to apologise,” Roger said
magnanimously. “Though I did warn you that I
should turn out to be right in the end, you
remember. Well, I don’t think you’ll trouble to dispute the
fact of murder any more, will you?”</p>

<p>“Don’t rub it in,” Alec protested. “I did it
for the best, like the doctor in the poem. Well,
what’s the next move?”</p>

<p>“Let’s go out and have a look at that footprint
at close range, shall we?” Roger suggested. “There
might be some others, too. Footprints! We <em>are</em>
getting professional, aren’t we?”</p>

<p>On a more careful inspection the footprint fully
bore out Roger’s contention that it must have been
made by a man stepping backward from the sill.
The heel end was nearly an inch and a half deep;
the toe scarcely half an inch. The edges were
slightly blurred where the earth had crumbled,
but the mark was clearly that of a large foot.</p>

<p>“At least a ten boot,” Roger said, stooping over
it. “Possibly eleven. This may be very useful
indeed, Alec.”</p>

<p>“It’s a bit of luck, certainly,” Alec agreed.</p>

<p>Roger straightened up and began to search
among the plants near the edge of the bed. After
a moment he dropped on his knees on the grass
border.</p>

<p>“Look!” he exclaimed excitedly. “Here’s
another!”</p>

<p>He parted two little shrubs and peered between
them. Alec saw another footprint, not so deep as
the last, but quite plainly marked in the dry earth.
The toe of this one was also pointing towards the
window.</p>

<p>“Same fellow?” he asked, bending over it.</p>

<p>“Yes,” Roger replied, examining the print
intently. “The other boot. Let’s see, this is well over
a yard from the last one, isn’t it? He must have
stepped back on to the path in two big strides.”
He rose to his feet and dusted the knees of his
trousers. “It’s a pity we can’t track him any
farther,” he added disappointedly.</p>

<p>“Can you do anything more with these?” Alec
asked with interest.</p>

<p>“I don’t know. We ought to take accurate
measurements of them some time, I suppose. Oh,
and there’s something else I should very much like
to do.”</p>

<p>“What’s that?”</p>

<p>“Get hold of a specimen boot from every male
person in the house and grounds and fit them into
these prints,” Roger exclaimed, raising his voice
slightly in his excitement. “Yes, that’s what we
ought to do if we possibly can.”</p>

<p>Alec was pondering.</p>

<p>“But look here, wouldn’t you say that these
footprints meant that the fellow was someone
outside the house? They show him getting away
from the place after Stanworth had been killed,
don’t they? If the chap had been someone inside
the house, why should he have troubled to get out
so elaborately through the window, when all he’d
got to do was to walk out by the door? After all
the other things he’d done to make it look like
suicide, it wouldn’t really be necessary to leave the
door locked on the inside, would it?”</p>

<p>“You mean we’re not likely to find a boot in the
house to correspond with these prints?”</p>

<p>“Not if the chap were someone from outside, no.
What do you think?”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, I agree. I think in all probability
it was someone not belonging to the household.
You’re quite right about the existence of these
footprints all pointing to that conclusion. But we
don’t actually <em>know</em>, do we? And I believe in
eliminating all possibilities, however remote. If we
can get a chance to try everyone’s boots out and
they don’t fit, then we know quite definitely that
everybody in this house is free from suspicion of
committing the crime itself; though not from
suspicion of other things, by the way.”</p>

<p>“What other things?” Alec asked interestedly.</p>

<p>“Being an accessory after the fact. After,
certainly; and not improbably before, as well,
some of them. It seems to me, Alec,” Roger added
pathetically, “that three quarters of this
household seem to be accessories after the fact! It isn’t
fair.”</p>

<p>“Humph!” said Alec. This was trespassing
upon ground which he had no wish to cover. He felt
thankful that at any rate Barbara Shannon’s
mysterious behaviour had not come to Roger’s ears.
What would the latter have said had he heard of
that? Accessory after the fact seemed mild in
comparison.</p>

<p>“Hullo! What’s up?” he asked, suddenly
catching sight of Roger.</p>

<p>That gentleman was listening intently, his head
on one side. At Alec’s words he held up his finger
warningly.</p>

<p>“Thought I heard someone in the library!” he
whispered. “You creep up to the lattice window
and look through. I’ll try the French ones.
Carefully!”</p>

<p>Enjoying himself thoroughly, he made his way
stealthily to the side of the French windows and
peeped cautiously round them. He had his reward.
The library door was closing softly.</p>

<p>He hurried back to Alec. “Did you see?” he
asked, in a voice thick with suppressed excitement.
“Did you see?”</p>

<p>Alec nodded. “Somebody was going out of the
library,” he said.</p>

<p>“Yes, but did you see who it was, man?”</p>

<p>Alec shook his head. “No, I’m afraid I didn’t.
Got here too late.”</p>

<p>The two looked at each other in silence.</p>

<p>“The question is, were we overheard?” Roger
said at last.</p>

<p>“Good Lord!” Alec exclaimed in dismay. “Do
you think we were?”</p>

<p>“Impossible to say. I hope to goodness we
weren’t, though. It would rather give things away,
wouldn’t it?”</p>

<p>“Hopelessly!” said Alec with fervour.</p>

<p>Roger looked at him curiously. “Why, Alexander,
you’re actually getting quite keen on the chase
at last!”</p>

<p>“It’s—it <em>is</em> rather exciting,” Alec confessed,
almost apologetically.</p>

<p>“That’s the spirit. Well, come off that bed and
let’s get farther away from the house to discuss
what’s to be done next. It’s not safe to talk near
these windows, evidently. Hullo, you’ve made
rather a mess of the bed. Steady! Don’t step on
our two particular prints.”</p>

<p>Alec glanced ruefully at the bed, which was now
embellished with several extra footprints.</p>

<p>“I’d better smooth mine out,” he said hastily.
“They look a bit suspicious, all round that window,
don’t they? Anyone can see that we’ve been
mucking about here.”</p>

<p>“Yes, do,” Roger said approvingly. “But hurry
up, and for goodness’ sake, don’t let anybody
see you. That would be worse still.”</p>

<p>“And now, Sherlock Sheringham,” said Alec,
when they had gained the security of the lawn,
“what do you propose? Isn’t it time you
disguised yourself, or something? I’m sure the best
detectives always do that at about this stage of the
proceedings.”</p>

<p>“Don’t be ribald, friend Alec,” Roger said
reprovingly. “This is a very serious business, and
we’re getting along with it very nicely. I think our
next move is fairly clear, isn’t it? We embark on
the quest of the Mysterious Stranger.”</p>

<p>“What mysterious stranger?”</p>

<p>“I mean, we make some inquiries round about
as to whether any stranger was seen near the place
last night. The lodge, the station, the village, and
the rest of it.”</p>

<p>“That seems a sound scheme.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but before we start there’s just one other
thing I want to do. You saw how productive the
contents of the waste-paper basket were. I should
like to have a look at yesterday’s as well.”</p>

<p>“Haven’t they been destroyed?”</p>

<p>“No, I don’t think so. I made some inquiries
while you were otherwise engaged just now, saying
that I had thrown away a letter I meant to keep,
and as far as I can make out the contents of all the
waste-paper baskets are emptied on to an ash pit
at the back of the house, where they lie till William
sees fit to use them up in a bonfire. I want to have
a peep at that ash pit before we start. Not that I
really expect to find anything, but you never
know.”</p>

<p>“How do we get there?”</p>

<p>“We’ll go round the front of the house; it’s
somewhere on the farther side, I think. We’d
better get a move on; we’ve got no time to waste.”</p>

<p>“I’m game,” said Alec, quite enthusiastically.</p>

<p>They set off.</p>

<p>In front of the house the car was standing, the
chauffeur lounging negligently at the wheel as if
he had been there some time.</p>

<p>Roger whistled softly.</p>

<p>“Hullo, hullo, hul-<em>lo!</em>” he said softly. “What’s
this?”</p>

<p>“It’s the car,” replied the ever literal Alec.</p>

<p>“I said you’d make a great detective one day,
if you ever took it up seriously, Alec. No, you
goop! What’s the car doing here? Who’s it
waiting for?”</p>

<p>“Better ask the chauffeur, I should think,” said
Alec, quite unruffled.</p>

<p>“I will.”</p>

<p>Alec slapped his pockets.</p>

<p>“Dash it all! I’ve left my pipe somewhere.
In the library, I think. I’ll run back for it while
you’re speaking to the chauffeur; that’ll give you
a chance to dawdle. Won’t be a minute.”</p>

<p>He jog-trotted round the angle of the house, and
Roger sauntered towards the chauffeur.</p>

<p>When Alec reappeared, pipe in mouth, two or
three minutes later, Roger was waiting for him
near the car. There was a look of mingled
apprehension and triumph on his face.</p>

<p>“Ah, here you are!” he exclaimed in a loud
voice. “Well, we’d better be off if we want anything
like a decent long walk before tea.”</p>

<p>Alec opened his mouth to speak, but caught a
warning look and was silent. Roger took his arm
and drew him at a rapid pace down the drive. It
was not till they had turned a corner and the house
was securely hidden from view that he spoke again.</p>

<p>“In here,” he observed briskly, and plunged into
the thick bushes which bordered the drive on either
side.</p>

<p>In some bewilderment Alec followed. “What’s
the idea?” he asked, as he rejoined his companion.</p>

<p>“A little game of hide-and-seek. You heard
what I fog-horned to you just now? That was for
the benefit of the chauffeur; so that just in case
anybody were to ask him what Messrs. Grierson
and Sheringham are up to this afternoon, he has
his answer pat. Now I want to see just how long
it is after the disappearance of the two said
gentlemen that that car leaves its anchorage. You see,
the chauffeur told me that he is waiting to take
Jefferson into Elchester, Alec.”</p>

<p>“I expect that’s right,” Alec replied intelligently.
“Jefferson said he’d got to go in, you remember.”</p>

<p>“He’s been waiting nearly half an hour, Alec.”</p>

<p>“Has he? Yes, probably he has. It must be
getting on for that since Jefferson came into the
library.”</p>

<p>“Therefore Jefferson intended to go into
Elchester half an hour ago, Alec. And he didn’t go,
Alec. And he’s been in the house all that time
instead, Alec. And somebody whom we couldn’t see
came into the library and went away very quietly
indeed, Alec. And can you put two and two
together, Alec?”</p>

<p>“Do you mean that—that it was Jefferson who
came into the library that time?”</p>

<p>“Amazing!” observed Roger admiringly. “I
can’t think how the man does it. It must be
something to do with wireless. Yes, Alec; you’re
quite right. I most certainly do think it was
Jefferson who came into the library that time.
But don’t you see the other significance? Why
didn’t he go into Elchester half an hour ago? He
was surely quite ready when he came and told us.
Was it because I somehow roused his suspicions,
asking him about priest-holes and things, and he
stayed behind to spy on us and find out what we
were up to?”</p>

<p>“The Lord knows!” said Alec helplessly.</p>

<p>“Well, it looks like it, doesn’t it? It looks as
if Jefferson is getting suspicious. Uncommonly
suspicious. I don’t like it. Things are going to
get awkward if they get wind of our little game.
We shan’t be able to investigate in peace any
longer.”</p>

<p>“Dashed awkward,” Alec agreed feelingly.</p>

<p>“Hush!” Roger crouched down hastily behind
a bush, and Alec followed suit. As they did so,
there came the noise of an approaching car, and
the big blue Sunbeam swept past them and down
the drive.</p>

<p>Roger glanced at his watch.</p>

<p>“Humph! Started four minutes after we did.
It all fits in, doesn’t it? But there’s one thing
that really is worrying me badly.”</p>

<p>“What’s that?”</p>

<p>They scrambled through the undergrowth and
headed for the house once more. Roger turned
impressively to Alec.</p>

<p>“Did he or did he not hear what we were saying
outside that window? And if he did, how much?”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch14">

<h2>CHAPTER XIV. <br/> Dirty Work at the Ash Pit</h2>

<p>The ash pit proved easy to locate. It lay among
some outhouses and was surrounded on three sides
by mellow old red-brick walls, the space within
which was filled with a depressed-looking mass of
rotting vegetable matter, old paper, and tins. The
smell that hung heavily about it was not a nice one.</p>

<p>“Have we got to search that?” Alec asked,
eyeing the view with considerable disfavour.</p>

<p>“We have,” Roger returned, and plunged
happily into the smell. “Can’t expect to get through a
job like ours without a certain amount of dirty
work, you know.”</p>

<p>“Personally, I prefer my dirty work at the
crossroads,” Alec murmured, following his intrepid
leader with the greatest reluctance. “They’re
cleaner. Dirty work at the ash pit doesn’t seem to
appeal to me in the least.” He began gingerly to
handle the cleanest pieces of paper he could see,
which happened to be old newspapers.</p>

<p>Roger was rooting contentedly among a heap
of scraps and shreds in the middle. “These on
the top seem to be yesterday’s collection all right,”
he announced. “Yes, here’s the envelope from a
letter of mine that came by the first post. Hum!
Nothing in this lot, as far as I can see.”</p>

<p>“What exactly are we looking for?” Alec
asked after a short pause, glancing with some
interest at the county cricket page of a newspaper
three weeks old.</p>

<p>“What am <em>I</em> looking for, you mean? Come on,
you lazy blighter. This is the waste-paper basket
heap, over here. You won’t find anything among
those tins and newspapers. I don’t know what I’m
looking for.”</p>

<p>“There won’t be anything here,” Alec urged
earnestly. “Let’s chuck it, and go off to make those
inquiries.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid you’re right,” said Roger
reluctantly. “I’ve gone back about a week here, and
haven’t struck anything of the faintest interest.
Below this everything pretty well rotted away,
too. Still, I’ll just—— Hullo! What’s this?”</p>

<p>“What?”</p>

<p>Roger had straightened up abruptly and was
scrutinising with bent brows a grimy piece of paper
he held in his hand. The next moment he whistled
softly.</p>

<p>“Here is something, though!” he exclaimed,
and scrambled to dry land. “Here, what do you
make of this?”</p>

<p>He handed the paper to Alec, who studied it
carefully. It was very wet and limp, but a few
traces of writing in pencil could still be made out
on its surface, while here and there an isolated
word or phrase stood out fairly legibly.</p>

<p>“It looks like a letter,” Alec said slowly. “Hullo,
did you see this? ‘Frightened almost out of my . . .’
Out of my life, that must be.”</p>

<p>Roger nodded portentously. “That’s exactly
what caught my eye. The writing’s Stanworth’s;
I can recognise that. But I shouldn’t say it was a
letter. He wouldn’t write a letter in pencil. It’s
probably some notes; or it may be the rough draft
of a letter. Yes, that’s more likely. Look, you can
make that bit out—see? ‘Serious dang—’ Serious
danger, my boy! Alec, we’re on the track of
something here.” He took the paper from the other’s
hands and studied it afresh.</p>

<p>“Can’t see who it’s addressed to, can you?” Alec
asked excitedly.</p>

<p>“No, worse luck; the first line or two has
absolutely gone. Wait a minute, there’s something
here. ‘This n-e-i-’ and the last two letters look
like o-d. A long word. What’s that?” He pointed
with a quivering finger.</p>

<p>“N-e-i-g, isn’t it?” said Alec. “And that’s
an r. Neighbourhood!”</p>

<p>“By Jove, so it is! ‘This neighbourhood.’ And
here’s something else. ‘That br-u-t . . .’ ‘That
brute——’ ”</p>

<p>“Prince!”</p>

<p>“Prince?”</p>

<p>“The next word. See? You can make it out
quite distinctly.”</p>

<p>“So it is! Good for you, Alec. ‘That brute
Prince.’ Good Lord, do you realise what this
means?” Roger’s excitement was showing signs
of becoming uncontrollable; his eyes were sparkling
and he was breathing as if he had just run a
hundred yards in eleven seconds.</p>

<p>“It’s jolly important,” Alec concurred, beaming.
“I mean, it shows that——”</p>

<p>“Important!” Roger almost howled. “Don’t
you see, man? It means that we know the
murderer’s name!”</p>

<p>“<em>What?</em>”</p>

<p>“It’s put the game right in our hands.
Stanworth was murdered by a man called Prince, whom
he knew to be in the neighbourhood and—— But
let’s go somewhere rather more secluded and study
this document some more.”</p>

<p>The nearest outhouse offering a safe refuge,
they withdrew hastily and scrutinised their find
more closely. After ten minutes’ concentrated
effort they found themselves in possession of the
following:</p>

<p>“. . . that brute Prince . . . this neighbourhood . . .
serious danger . . . fright of my life this morning
on chancing to . . . be locked up . . .”</p>

<p>“I think that’s absolutely all that’s decipherable,
without a magnifying glass, at any rate,” Roger
said at length, folding up the precious paper and
stowing it carefully away in his pocketbook.
“But it’s plain enough, isn’t it? So forward!”
He marched out of the shed and turned in the
direction of the drive.</p>

<p>“Where to now?” asked the faithful Alec,
hurrying after him.</p>

<p>“To find Master Prince,” Roger returned
grimly.</p>

<p>“Ah! You think he’s still about here?”</p>

<p>“I think it’s quite probable. He’s been in
communication with Jefferson this morning, hasn’t he?
At any rate, we can soon find out.”</p>

<p>“What exactly have you deduced then?”</p>

<p>“Well, there’s precious little deduction needed;
the thing speaks for itself. Stanworth, for some
reason still unknown to us, had cause to fear a
man named Prince. To his surprise and terror he
chanced to encounter him unexpectedly one
morning about a week ago in this neighbourhood, and
knew at once that he was in serious danger. He
comes home at once, makes a rough draft of a
letter, and then writes off to some other person
telling him all about it and asking, probably, for
help; at the same time expressing his conviction
that Prince ought to be locked up.”</p>

<p>“It’s curious,” Alec mused.</p>

<p>“Fishy, you mean? Yes, but we’ve had a
suspicion for some time that there was something
fishy going on behind the scenes in all this, haven’t
we? Not only with regard to the behaviour of
the other people in the house, but even possibly in
connection with old Stanworth himself. But we’re
hot on the trail this time, I think.”</p>

<p>“What’s your plan of campaign?” Alec asked,
as they turned into the drive.</p>

<p>“Well, we must make a few discreet inquiries.
In fact, our course will be much the same as we
contemplated before, except that our field of action
has luckily been narrowed down very considerably.
Instead of chasing about after some nebulous
stranger, we’ve now got a definite goal. We had
a pretty good idea of what he looks like before, but
now we even know the blighter’s name. Oh, this
is going to be too easy.”</p>

<p>“How do you mean—we had a pretty good idea
of what he looks like?”</p>

<p>“Well, haven’t we? We know he must be strong,
because of what happened in the library;
Stanworth was no weakling, remember. Then the size of
his footprints shows that he was a large man,
probably tall. I can’t tell you the colour of his hair or
how many false teeth he’s got; but we’ve got a
good working idea of his appearance for all that.”</p>

<p>“But what are you going to do, if you do succeed
in finding him? You can’t go up to him and say,
‘Good-afternoon, Mr. Prince. I believe you
murdered Mr. Stanworth at two o’clock this morning.’
It—it isn’t done.”</p>

<p>“You leave all that to me,” Roger returned
largely. “I’ll think of something to say to him all
right.”</p>

<p>“I’m sure you will,” Alec murmured with
conviction.</p>

<p>“In the meantime, here’s the lodge. What about
seeing if William’s in? He lives here, doesn’t he?
Or Mrs. William. They might have opened the
gates to this man Prince last night.”</p>

<p>“Right-ho. But be discreet.”</p>

<p>“Really, Alec!” said Roger with dignity, as he
tapped on the lodge door.</p>

<p>William’s wife was a round-faced, apple-cheeked
old lady with a pair of twinkling blue eyes that
looked as if they saw something humorous in most
of the things upon which they rested; as no doubt
they did, considering that they belonged to the
wife of William.</p>

<p>“Good-afternoon, gentlemen,” she said, with a
little old-fashioned bob. “Would it be me you were
wanting?”</p>

<p>“Good-afternoon,” Roger replied with a smile.
“We were wondering if William happened to be at
home.”</p>

<p>“Me ’usband? Lor’, no, sir; he’s never at home
at this time. He’s got his work to do.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I suppose he’s about the garden somewhere,
is he?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir. Cuttin’ pea-sticks in the orchard,
I think he is. Was it anything important?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no; nothing important. I’ll call around and
see him later on.”</p>

<p>“Shocking business this, sir; about the master,”
Mrs. William began volubly. “Shocking! Such
a thing’s never been known at Layton Court
before, not in my time it ’asn’t; nor ever before that,
so far as I’ve ’eard tell. An’ did you see the corpse,
sir? Shot hisself in the ’ead, didn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Yes, shocking,” said Roger hastily. “Shocking!
By the way, I was expecting a friend last night
rather late, but he never turned up. You didn’t see
anything of him here I suppose, did you?”</p>

<p>“About what time would that be, sir?”</p>

<p>“Oh, somewhere about eleven o’clock, I should
think; or even later.”</p>

<p>“No, sir; that I didn’t. William an’ me was both
on us in bed and asleep before half-past ten.”</p>

<p>“I see. And you close the gates when you lock
up for the night, don’t you?”</p>

<p>“That we do, sir. Unless there’s orders come
down to the contrary. They was shut near after
ten o’clock last night, an’ not opened till Halbert
(that’s the showfure) came down early this
mornin’. Was your friend coming by motor car, sir?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know. It depended. Why?”</p>

<p>“Because there’s always the little gate at the
side left open, which people on foot can come in by.
All I can tell you, sir, is that nobody came to my
knowledge, which he naturally wouldn’t ’ave done
if he never came up to the house, would he? Not
without he got lost in the drive, which isn’t very
likely in a manner of speaking.”</p>

<p>“No, I’m afraid he can’t have come at all. In
any case, you say that, up to the time you went to
bed, no stranger at all came in? Absolutely
nobody?”</p>

<p>“No, sir. Nobody to my knowledge.”</p>

<p>“Oh, well; that quite settles it. By the way,
only yesterday afternoon poor Mr. Stanworth was
asking me to do him a favour the next time I went
for a walk. It was to call in and see someone called
Prince for him, and——”</p>

<p>“Prince?” Mrs. William interrupted with
unexpected energy. “Don’t you go going anywhere
near <em>him</em>, sir.”</p>

<p>“Why not?” Roger asked eagerly, flashing a
look of triumph at Alec.</p>

<p>Mrs. William hesitated. “You do mean Prince,
sir? John?”</p>

<p>“Yes, John; that’s right. Why mustn’t I go
anywhere near him?”</p>

<p>“Because he’s dangerous, sir,” said Mrs. William
vehemently. “Downright dangerous! In fact”—she
lowered her voice significantly—“it’s my
opinion that he’s a little mad.”</p>

<p>“Mad?” Roger echoed in surprise. “Oh, come;
I don’t think that can be the case, can it?”</p>

<p>“Well, look how he went for Mr. Stanworth that
time, sir. You know about that, of course?”</p>

<p>Roger hurriedly checked a whistle. “I’ve heard
something about it,” he said glibly. “Er—attacked
him, didn’t he?”</p>

<p>“That he did, sir. And all for no reason at all.
In fact, if one of Mr. Wetherby’s farm hands hadn’t
luckily been by, he might ’ave done Mr. Stanworth
a power of harm. Of course they did their
best to hush it up; it gives the place a bad name
if them things get about. But <em>I</em> heard on it all
right.”</p>

<p>“Indeed? I had no idea it was as bad as that.
There was—how shall I put it?—bad blood
between them?”</p>

<p>“Well, you might call it that, sir. He seemed to
take a dislike to Mr. Stanworth the very first time
’e saw him, like.”</p>

<p>“Rather a drastic way of showing it,” Roger
laughed. “Perhaps he has got a screw loose, as
you say. He hasn’t been here long then?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no. Not more’n a matter of three weeks
or so, sir.”</p>

<p>“Well, I think I shall risk it. What I wanted to
ask you was the quickest way of getting there.”</p>

<p>“To Mr. Wetherby’s? Why, you can’t go quicker
than follow the road through the village, sir; that
takes you straight there. It’s about a mile an’ a
half from here, or maybe a trifle more.”</p>

<p>“Mr. Wetherby’s; yes. Let me see, that’s——?”</p>

<p>“Hillcrest Farm, sir. A very nice gentleman he
is, too. Him an’ Mr. Stanworth was getting quite
friendly before—before——”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Roger hurriedly. “Well, thank you
very much. I’m so sorry to have kept you all this
time.”</p>

<p>“You’re welcome, sir, I’m sure,” rejoined Mrs.
William smilingly. “Good-afternoon, sir.”</p>

<p>“Good-afternoon.”</p>

<p>Mrs. William popped back into her lodge again,
and the two struck into the main road.</p>

<p>Roger’s pent-up emotions burst forth as soon as
they were out of earshot. “<em>There!</em>” he exclaimed.
“What do you think of that, eh?”</p>

<p>“Extraordinary!” Alec ejaculated, hardly less
excited.</p>

<p>“But what a bit of luck just to hit on possibly
the one person who would have been willing to give
us all the information. Luck? It’s positively
uncanny. Well, I never guessed that detecting was
as easy as this.”</p>

<p>“We’re going straight after this man Prince,
then?”</p>

<p>“You bet we are. We want to catch our bird
before he flies.”</p>

<p>“You think he intends flying?”</p>

<p>“Most probably, I should say,” Roger replied,
striding along the dusty road at top speed. “He’s
only been in the place three weeks, you see, so he
evidently came with the full intention of doing
what he has done; now the job’s accomplished
there’s no need for him to stay any longer. Oh, he’s
a clever one, is Master Prince. But not quite clever
enough.”</p>

<p>“He attacked Stanworth once before apparently
and in broad daylight.”</p>

<p>“Yes, didn’t she bring that out beautifully?
I could have screamed with excitement. It all fits
together, doesn’t it? ‘Seemed to take a dislike to
him at first sight, like.’ Ah, Mrs. William, that
wasn’t first sight; not by a long chalk. I expect that
happened after Stanworth wrote his letter;
otherwise he’d have mentioned it.”</p>

<p>“It may have been in one of the bits that have
disappeared.”</p>

<p>“That’s true; there were some long gaps. Look
here, I’ll tell you what we’d better do—call in
at the village pub on our way and see if we can
get any more information out of the landlord. He’s
sure to know everything that happens round
here.”</p>

<p>“That seems a sound scheme,” Alec agreed
readily.</p>

<p>“In the meantime, let’s marshal our facts—that’s
the correct phrase, isn’t it? This man Prince
has managed to obtain employment of some kind
on the farm of a Mr. Wetherby, who appears to be
a gentleman farmer. That was a cunning move of
his, by the way; gives a reason for his presence in
the neighbourhood, you see. He came here for some
definite purpose connected with Stanworth; I don’t
say murder necessarily, that may not have been
intended at first. The very first time he saw
Stanworth his feelings were so much for him that he
went for the old man bald-headed. The affair was
hushed up, but there’s certain to have been some
gossip about it.”</p>

<p>“Silly thing to do, that,” Alec commented.</p>

<p>“Yes, very; showed his hand too soon. Still,
there you are; he did it. And now let us devote all
our energies to reaching this scorching village.
Time’s precious, and I want to ruminate a little.”</p>

<p>They walked rapidly down the winding white
road into the village and made for the local
public-house. Time was, indeed, so precious that no
considerations of temperature could be allowed to
interfere with their expenditure of it.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch15">

<h2>CHAPTER XV. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Amuses an Ancient Rustic</h2>

<p>After the blazing sun and the dust, the cool bar
of the old-fashioned little village inn, with its
sanded floor and its brasses gleaming in the soft
twilight, was remarkably welcome.</p>

<p>Roger buried his nose thankfully in his tankard
before getting to business.</p>

<p>“My word, that’s good!” he observed in heartfelt
tones to the landlord, setting the tankard down
half empty on the polished counter. “There’s
nothing like beer for thirst, is there?”</p>

<p>“That’s true enough, sir,” replied the landlord
heartily, both because it was good for trade and
because he thoroughly believed it. “And you can’t
have too much of it on a day like this, I’m
thinking,” he added, with an eye to the former
consideration.</p>

<p>Roger looked about him appreciatively.</p>

<p>“Nice little place you’ve got here.”</p>

<p>“Not so bad, sir. There ain’t a better bar
parlour within ten miles, though I say it as shouldn’t.
You two gentlemen come far to-day?”</p>

<p>“Elchester,” said Roger briefly. He did not wish
to divulge the fact that he was staying at Layton
Court, having no desire to waste time in parrying
the stream of questions that would inevitably
result from this information.</p>

<p>“Ah, then, you would have a thirst on you and
all,” the landlord remarked approvingly.</p>

<p>“We have,” agreed Roger, finishing up the
contents of his tankard, “so you can fill these up
again for us.”</p>

<p>The landlord replenished the tankards and
leaned confidentially over the counter.</p>

<p>“You heard the noos? There ain’t half been
goings on round these parts this morning. Up at
Layton Court. You’d pass it on the left coming
from Elchester; nigh on a mile back. Gentleman
shot hisself there, they say. The showver, ’e told
me about it. Came in for a glass o’ beer, ’e did,
same as what you two gentlemen might be doing
now, an’ told me all about it. Wasn’t ’arf put out
about it, ’e wasn’t. Wanted the day off to-morrow,
an’ now he can’t ask for it, what with having to
cart the police an’ everyone backwards and
forwards an’ all.”</p>

<p>Roger hurriedly subdued the involuntary smile
that had risen to his lips on learning Albert’s
personal view of the tragedy. It would have made a
striking epitaph, he felt. “Sacred to the memory
of John Brown, who died, greatly regretted by
everybody, especially his chauffeur, who wanted
the day off.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I did hear something about it,” he replied
carelessly. “Shocking affair. And how do you find
business round here?”</p>

<p>“Mustn’t complain, I suppose,” said the
landlord guardedly; “this bein’ the only public in the
village, y’ see. An’ good drinkers they are round
these parts, too,” he added with enthusiasm.</p>

<p>“That’s fine. I like a man who can appreciate
good beer when he gets it. And I suppose you get
quite a few strangers in here from time to time as
well?”</p>

<p>“No, none too many,” said the landlord
regretfully. “We lie a bit off the chief roads here, y’ see.
Not but what a few walking gentlemen such as
yourselves don’t drop in now and then, for all
that.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose you get a walking gentleman
now and then,” Roger replied vaguely, wondering
what exactly constituted a walking gentleman, and
whether he was the opposite to a running
gentleman. “How often would that be?”</p>

<p>“Well, sir, that depends, don’t it?” said the
landlord cautiously, evidently determined to be
entrapped into no rash statements. “Yes, that
depends.”</p>

<p>“Does it? Well, take a special day. How many
strangers came in yesterday, for instance?”</p>

<p>“Lor’ bless you, sir, we don’t get ’em in like
that; not so many in a day. In a month, more like.
Why, I don’t suppose there’s been a stranger in
this bar before you gents come in not for a matter
o’ nearly a week.”</p>

<p>“You don’t say!”</p>

<p>“I do, sir,” retorted the landlord with much
earnestness. “I do an’ all.”</p>

<p>“Well, I should have thought you’d have got
plenty in a cosy little place like this. Anyhow, you
can be sure that I shall warn all my friends to
come and pay you a visit if they happen to be in
the neighbourhood. Better beer I’ve never tasted
anywhere.”</p>

<p>“It <em>is</em> good beer,” the landlord admitted, almost
reluctantly. “Thank you kindly, sir. And anything
I can do in return for you and your friends, I’m
sure I’ll be most happy.”</p>

<p>“Well, you can do something now, as a matter
of fact,” Roger rejoined caressingly. “We’ve come
over from Elchester to see Prince—er John, you
know. Up at Hillcrest Farm.”</p>

<p>The landlord nodded. “Aye; I know.”</p>

<p>“So if you could put us on the right road from
here, we should be very grateful.”</p>

<p>“Turn to the left when you get out of here and
go straight on, sir,” returned the landlord promptly.
“You can’t miss it. First farm on the right-’and
side past the crossroads.”</p>

<p>“Thanks very much. Let me see, I’ve never
actually met Prince before, but he’s pretty easy
to recognise, I understand. Big fellow, isn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Aye, that ’e is. Matter o’ nigh on six feet from
the top of his ’ead down; when he ’olds ’is ’ead up,
that is.”</p>

<p>“Ah, stoops a bit, does he?”</p>

<p>“Well, you might call it that, sir. ’Angs ’is ’ead,
in a manner of speakin’. You know ’ow they
do.”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes; quite. Strong chap, too, isn’t he?”</p>

<p>“’E is, an’ all. It ’ud take all of six men to ’old
him, if ’e did get rampageous.”</p>

<p>“Pretty quiet usually, then, is he?”</p>

<p>“Oh, aye. ’E’s quiet enough.”</p>

<p>“But no fool, I gather. I mean, he’s pretty
intelligent, isn’t he?”</p>

<p>The landlord chuckled hoarsely. “Lor’ bless
you, no. Prince ain’t no fool. ’E’s a clever devil, all
right. Cunning, you might call ’im. Nor you
wouldn’t be far wrong, neither.”</p>

<p>“Oh? In what way?”</p>

<p>“Oh, pretty nigh every way,” said the landlord
vaguely. “But it’s a pity you two gents should
have ’ad this walk out to-day. Prince was in
Helchester ’isself yesterday.”</p>

<p>“Oho!” observed Roger softly, with a side-glance
at Alec. “He was, was he?”</p>

<p>“Aye, at the Hagricultooral Show, ’e was.”</p>

<p>“Oh? What was he doing there?”</p>

<p>“Showin’.”</p>

<p>“Showing himself, was he?”</p>

<p>“Aye, that ’e was. An’ took a prize, too.”</p>

<p>“What a pity we didn’t know that; it would
have saved us a journey to-day. By the way, you
don’t know what time he came back, do you?
Mr. Wetherby was there, too, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“Mr. Wetherby was there, but Prince didn’t
come back with ’im. I see Mr. Wetherby pass by
’ere on ’is mare soon after seven o’clock. Prince
wouldn’t ’ave come till a deal later than that.
But they’ll tell you up at the farm better nor I
can about that.”</p>

<p>“Oh, well, it isn’t really of the least importance,
so long as I can see him up there now.”</p>

<p>“He’s up there now right enough, sir. You ask
any of the men up there an’ they’ll show you.”</p>

<p>Roger finished up the remains of his beer and
put the tankard down on the counter with a
business-like air.</p>

<p>“Well, Alec,” he said briskly. “Time we were
getting along if we’re ever to get back to Elchester
to-day.”</p>

<p>“You really are rather marvellous, you know,
Roger,” Alec observed, as they set out along the
road once more.</p>

<p>“I know I am,” Roger said candidly. “But why
particularly?”</p>

<p>“Carrying on a chat with the landlord like that.
I couldn’t have done it to save my life. I shouldn’t
know what to say.”</p>

<p>“I suppose it comes naturally,” Roger replied
complacently. “I’m a bit of what our American
friends call a mixer. As a matter of fact, I
thoroughly enjoy a yap with somebody like that;
friend William, for instance. And it all comes in
useful, you know; local colour and so on. But what
about the information I was able to extract, eh?”</p>

<p>“Yes, we got a few more details, didn’t we?”</p>

<p>“Highly important ones, too. What do you make
of Master Prince showing on his own account at
Elchester? That puts him in rather an independent
position, doesn’t it? And he wasn’t back till late
last night, you see. It all tallies.”</p>

<p>“Yes, we seem to be on the right track this
time.”</p>

<p>“Of course we’re on the right track. How could
we be anything else? The evidence is overwhelming.
As a matter of fact,” Roger added thoughtfully,
“I believe I can make a pretty good guess as to
what actually happened last night.”</p>

<p>“Oh? What?”</p>

<p>“Why, friend Prince, naturally somewhat elated
at winning a prize at the show, got drinking with
some of the new pals he must have picked up here
and had a couple of drops too much. On his way
back he passes Layton Court and either rattles the
side door and notices it ajar; in any case, walks in
and up to the French windows, which are open.
Stanworth, who we know was mortally afraid of
him, jumps at his appearance and threatens him
with a revolver. In the struggle, Stanworth is shot,
either on purpose or accidentally. That sobers
friend Prince up more than a little, and, with the
cunning we know him to possess, he sets the stage
for us to find the next morning. How’s that?”</p>

<p>“It’s quite possible,” Alec admitted. “But what
I want to know is—how are we going to tackle
Prince now?”</p>

<p>“Wait and see what happens. I shall get into
conversation with him and try to get him to
account for his movements last night. If he gets
obstreperous, we shall simply have to lay him out;
that’s all. You’ll come in useful there, by the way.”</p>

<p>“Humph!” Alec observed.</p>

<p>“In any case,” Roger concluded enthusiastically,
“it’s going to be dashed exciting. You can take
my word for that.”</p>

<p>There was no mistaking Hillcrest Farm. It lay
on the top of a sharp rise just as the landlord had
described it. The two instinctively slackened their
steps as they approached, as if unconsciously
reconnoitring the scene of battle.</p>

<p>“I don’t want to enlist Wetherby just yet,”
Roger murmured. “I think we ought to try and
tackle him ourselves. And we don’t want to give
the alarm in any case, or arouse any suspicions.
That’s why I didn’t put hundreds more questions
to that landlord. What do you think?”</p>

<p>“Oh, absolutely. What about asking that old
chap if he knows where Prince is?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I will.” Roger strolled over towards the
spot where an ancient rustic was clipping one of
Mr. Wetherby’s hedges. “I want to speak to Mr.
Prince,” he confided to the ancient. “Can you tell
me where I shall find him?”</p>

<p>“Sir?” queried the other, curving a large and
horny hand round an equally large and horny ear.</p>

<p>“I want to speak to Mr. Prince,” Roger repeated
loudly. “Where is he?”</p>

<p>The ancient did not move. “Sir?” he remarked
stolidly.</p>

<p>“Prince!” bawled Roger. “Where?”</p>

<p>“Oh, <em>Prince</em>! ’E’s in the next field alongside.
Up ’tother end I seed ’im last, not above five
minutes back.”</p>

<p>The horny palm ceased to function as an
ear-trumpet and became a receptacle for a spare
shilling of Roger’s, and the two moved on. In the side of
the next field was set a sturdy gate. Roger swung
himself easily over it, the light of battle in his eyes.
Alec followed suit, and they advanced together up
the centre of the field.</p>

<p>“I can’t see anyone here, can you?” Roger
remarked, when they had gone some little distance.
“Perhaps he’s gone somewhere else.”</p>

<p>“Nothing but a cow in that corner. Is there any
other way out of the field? He didn’t get over that
gate into the road within the last five minutes.
We should have seen him.”</p>

<p>Roger halted and gazed round carefully. “Yes,
there’s a—— Hullo! What’s the matter with that
cow? She seems very interested in us.”</p>

<p>The cow, a large, powerful-looking animal, had
indeed quitted its corner and was advancing
purposefully in their direction. Its head was swaying
curiously from side to side and it was emitting a
noise not unlike the hoot of a steamer.</p>

<p>“My God!” Alec shouted suddenly. “That
isn’t a cow; it’s a bull! Run like hell!”</p>

<p>Roger needed no second invitation; he set off at
top speed in the wake of the flying Alec. The bull,
observing this disappointing procedure, thundered
after them. It was an exciting race while it lasted.</p>

<p>The result, some six seconds later, was as follows:</p>

<blockquote class="result"><div>

  <ol>
    <li>Mr. A. Grierson.</li>
    <li>Mr. R. Sheringham.</li>
    <li>Bull.</li>
  </ol>

  <p>Distance between first and second, ten yards;
  between second and third, one five-barred gate (taken
  by the second in his stride).</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>“’Strewth!” Roger observed with feeling, and
collapsed incontinently into a ditch.</p>

<p>A hoarse and grating noise caused them to look
up. The noise emanated from the ancient. He was
laughing.</p>

<p>“Nearly ’ad you that time, gents,” he croaked
joyfully. “Ain’t seen him go fer anyone like that
not since he went fer that Mr. Stanfoerth, or
whatever ’e calls ’isself—’im from Layton Court. I
ought to ’ave warned ’ee. You want ter be very
careful o’ that there Prince John.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch16">

<h2>CHAPTER XVI. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Lectures on Neo-Platonism</h2>

<p>“Alec,” interrupted Roger plaintively, “if you
say one more word to me about bulls, cows, or any
other farmyard impedimenta, I shall burst at once
into loud tears. I warn you.”</p>

<p>They were walking once more along the white,
dusty road; but the springy exhilaration of the
outward journey had gone out of their steps. A
short but pithy conversation with the ancient
rustic, conducted mostly in ear-splitting yells, had
speedily shown the crestfallen Roger the precise
nature of the wild goose (or should it be wild bull?)
he had been chasing. Alec, it might be noticed in
passing, was not being at all kind about it.</p>

<p>“If ever anything could have been more
obvious!” Roger pursued mournfully. “My reasoning
was perfectly sound. It almost looks as if Mrs.
William and that idiot of a landlord were trying
deliberately to deceive me. Why couldn’t they have
said straight out that the disgusting animal was a
bull and have done with it?”</p>

<p>“I don’t expect you gave them a chance,” Alec
remarked with an undisguised grin.</p>

<p>Roger gave him a dignified look and relapsed
into silence.</p>

<p>But not for long. “So here we are, back again
at the precise point we had reached before we ever
came across that miserable piece of paper,” he
resumed unhappily. “A whole valuable hour
wasted.”</p>

<p>“You’ve had some exercise, at any rate,” Alec
pointed out kindly. “Jolly good for you, too.”</p>

<p>“The point is, what are we going to do next?”</p>

<p>“Go back to tea,” said Alec promptly. “And
talking about wasting valuable time, I believe
that’s all we’re doing at all with regard to this
business. If such a clear clue as that fizzles out in this
way, why shouldn’t the whole thing be equally a
mare’s nest? I don’t believe there ever <em>was</em> a
murder, after all. Stanworth committed suicide.”</p>

<p>“Let’s see,” Roger went on, completely
disregarding this interruption, “we were setting out
to get on the trail of a Mysterious Stranger, weren’t
we? Well, that’s where we shall have to take the
thing up from. Luckily I kept my wits about me
enough to put a few questions about strangers to
those two, and we drew a blank. We will now
visit the station.”</p>

<p>“Oh, no!” Alec groaned. “Tea!”</p>

<p>“Station!” returned Roger firmly; and station
it was.</p>

<p>But even the station did not prove any more
fruitful. On the plea of making inquiries for a
friend, Roger succeeded in extracting with some
difficulty, from a very bucolic porter, the information
that only half-a-dozen trains in a day stopped
there (the place was indeed little more than a halt),
and none at all after seven o’clock in the evening.
The earliest in the morning was soon after six, and
no passengers had been picked up so far as he knew.
No, he hadn’t seen a stranger arrive yesterday;
leastways, not to notice one like.</p>

<p>“After all, it’s only what we might have
expected,” Roger remarked philosophically, as they
set off homewards at last. “If the fellow came by
train at all, he’d probably go to Elchester. He’s
no fool, as we knew very well.”</p>

<p>Alec, now that the prospect of tea and shade
was definitely before him, was ready to discuss the
matter rather more amicably.</p>

<p>“You’re quite sure now that he is a stranger,
then?” he asked. “You’ve given up the idea that
it’s anybody actually in this neighbourhood?”</p>

<p>“I’m nothing of the sort,” Roger retorted.
“I’m not sure of any blessed thing about him,
except that he wears large boots, is strong, and is no
ordinary criminal; and that he corresponds closely
with the quite distinct mental picture I had formed
of the late lamented Mr. John Prince. He may be
a stranger to the neighbourhood, and he may not.
We know that he was still in it during the morning,
because he managed to communicate with the
occupants of the household. But as for anything
more definite than that, we simply can’t say, not
knowing his motive. By Jove, I do wish we could
discover that! It would narrow things down
immensely.”</p>

<p>“I tell you something that never seems to have
occurred to us,” Alec remarked suddenly. “Why
shouldn’t it have been just an ordinary burglar,
who got so panic-stricken when he found he’d
actually killed his householder that he hadn’t the
nerve to complete what he came for and simply
hurried off? That seems to me as probable as
anything, and it fits the facts perfectly.”</p>

<p>“Ye-es; we did rather touch on the burglar idea
at the very beginning, didn’t we? Do you realise
that it was only five hours ago, by the way? It
seems more like five weeks. But that was before
the curious behaviour of all these other people
impressed itself upon us.”</p>

<p>“Upon you, you mean. I still think you’re
making ever so much too much of that side of it.
There’s probably some perfectly simple
explanation, if we only knew it. I suppose you mean
Jefferson and Mrs. Plant?”</p>

<p>“<em>And</em> Lady Stanworth!”</p>

<p>“And Lady Stanworth, then. Well, dash it all,
you can’t expect them to take us into their
confidence, can you? And that is the only way in which
their part can be cleared up. Not that it seems to
me in the least worth clearing up. I don’t see that
it could possibly have anything to do with the
murder. Good Lord, it’s practically the same thing
as accusing them of the murder itself! I ask you,
my dear chap, <em>can</em> you imagine either Mrs. Plant
or Lady Stanworth—we’ll leave Jefferson out for
the moment—actually plotting old Stanworth’s
murder! It’s really too ludicrous. You ought to
have more sense.”</p>

<p>“This particular topic always seems to excite
you, Alexander,” observed Roger mildly.</p>

<p>“Well, I mean, it’s so dashed absurd. You can’t
really believe anything of the sort.”</p>

<p>“Perhaps I don’t. Anyhow, we’ll shelve it till
something more definite crops up. It’s quite hot
enough already, without making each other still
more heated. Look here, let’s give the whole thing
a rest till we get back. It will clear our brains.
I’ll give you a short lecture on the influence of the
Platonic ethics on Hegelian philosophy instead,
with a few sidelights on neo-Platonism.” Which,
in spite of Alec’s spirited protests, he at once
proceeded to do.</p>

<p>In this way the time passed pleasantly and
instructively till they had passed the lodge gates
once more.</p>

<p>“So you see,” concluded Roger happily, “that
while in mediæval philosophy this mysticism is in
powerful and ultimately successful opposition to
rationalistic dogmatism, with its contemptuous
disregard for all experience, the embryonic science
of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries was actually
in itself a logical development of neo-Platonism in
this same opposition to barren rationalism.”</p>

<p>“Was it?” said Alec gloomily, registering a
secret but none the less fervent prayer that he
might never hear the word neo-Platonism again as
long as he lived. “I see.”</p>

<p>“You do? Good. Then let us seek out and have
speech with friend William.”</p>

<p>“Are you going to give him a short lecture on
rationalistic dogmatism?” Alec asked carefully.
“Because if so, I’m going indoors.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid it would be wasted on William,”
Roger replied seriously. “William, I feel sure, is
a dogmatist of the most bigoted type if ever there
was one; and to lecture to him on the futility of
dogma would be as ineffective as to harangue a
hippopotamus on the subject of drawing-room
etiquette. No, I just want to sound William a
little. Not that I think it will really be of much
help to us, but just at present I’m turning every
stone I can see.”</p>

<p>In due course William was run to earth in a
large greenhouse. He was mounted unhappily on
an exceedingly rickety pair of steps and engaged in
tying up a vine. On seeing Roger he hastily
descended to firm ground. William did not believe
in taking chances.</p>

<p>“Good-afternoon, William,” said Roger brightly.</p>

<p>“Arternoon, sir,” William responded
suspiciously.</p>

<p>“I’ve just been having a chat with your wife,
William.”</p>

<p>William grunted noncommittally.</p>

<p>“I was telling her that a friend of mine, whom I
expected to come up to the house to see me last
night, never turned up; and I was wondering if
you’d seen anything of him down at the lodge.”</p>

<p>William ostentatiously busied himself with a
small plant.</p>

<p>“Never see’d no one,” he observed with
decision.</p>

<p>“No? Never mind, then. It doesn’t really matter.
That’s an interesting job you’ve got on hand,
William. You take a plant out of its pot, sniff its
roots and put it back again; is that it? Now what
operation do you call that in the science of
horticulture?”</p>

<p>William hastily relinquished the plant and
glowered at his interlocutor.</p>

<p>“Some folks mayn’t have no work to do,” he
remarked darkly; “but other folks ’ave.”</p>

<p>“Meaning yourself, I take it?” Roger said
approvingly. “That’s right. Work away. Nothing
like it, is there? Keeps you cheerful and bright and
contented. Great thing, work, I agree with you.”</p>

<p>A flicker of interest passed across William’s
countenance. “What did that there Mr. Stanworth
want to shoot hisself for, eh?” he demanded
suddenly.</p>

<p>“I don’t know, to tell you the truth,” said
Roger, somewhat taken aback at the unexpectedness
of this query. “Why, have you got any ideas
about it?”</p>

<p>“I don’t ’old with it meself,” said William
primly. “Not with sooeycide.”</p>

<p>“You’re absolutely right, William,” Roger
replied warmly. “If more people were like you,
there’d be—there’d be less suicides, undoubtedly.
It’s an untidy habit, to say the least.”</p>

<p>“It ain’t acting right,” William pursued firmly.
“That’s what it ain’t.”</p>

<p>“You put it in a nutshell, William; it isn’t.
In fact, it’s acting all wrong. By the way, William,
somebody or other was telling me that a stranger
had been seen about the grounds during the last
day or two. You noticed him by any chance?”</p>

<p>“Stranger? What sort of a stranger?”</p>

<p>“Oh, the usual sort; a head and four pairs of
fingers, you know. This particular one, they said,
was a rather large man. Have you seen a rather
large strange man round the house lately?”</p>

<p>William cogitated deeply.</p>

<p>“I ’ave an’ all.”</p>

<p>“Have you, though? When?”</p>

<p>William cogitated again. “It ’ud be a matter of
ha’-past eight last night,” he announced at last.
“Ha’-past eight it ’ud be, as near as anything. I
was a-settin’ out in front o’ the lodge, an’ up he
walks, bold as brass, an’ nods at me an’ goes on
up the drive.”</p>

<p>Roger exchanged glances with Alec.</p>

<p>“Yes, William?” he said warmly. “A man you’d
never seen before? A fairly large man?”</p>

<p>“A very large man,” William corrected
meticulously.</p>

<p>“A very large man. Excellent! Go on. What
happened?”</p>

<p>“Well, I says to the missus, ‘Oo’s that?’ I says.
‘A-walkin’ up the drive as if he owned the place.’ ”
William pondered. “ ‘As if he <em>owned</em> the place,’ I
says,” he repeated firmly.</p>

<p>“And a very good thing to say, too. Well?”</p>

<p>“ ‘Oh, ’im?’ she says. ‘’E’s the cook’s brother,’
she says. ‘I was interjuiced to ’im at Helchester
the other day,’ she says. ‘At least, she <em>says</em> ’e’s ’er
brother,’ she says.” A strange rasping noise in his
throat appeared to indicate that William was
amused. “ ‘At least, she <em>says</em> ’e’s ’er brother,’ she
says,” he repeated with much enjoyment.</p>

<p>“Oh!” Roger exclaimed, somewhat dashed.
“Oh, did she? And did you see him again,
William?”</p>

<p>“That I did. Back ’e come nigh on a quarter of
a hower later, an’ cook with ’im, a-hangin’ on ’is
arm like what she ought to have known better
not to ’ave done,” William rejoined, suddenly
stern. “I don’t ’old with it meself, I don’t,” added
this severe moralist. “Not at ’er age, I don’t.”
His expression relaxed reminiscently. “ ‘At least,
she <em>says</em> ’e’s ’er brother,’ she says,” he added, with
a sudden rasp.</p>

<p>“I see,” said Roger. “Thank you, William.
Well, I suppose we mustn’t interrupt you any
more. Come on, Alec.”</p>

<p>Slowly and sadly they made their way back to
the house.</p>

<p>“William got his own back then, if he only
knew it,” Roger said with a wry smile. “I did think
for a moment that we might be getting at
something at last.”</p>

<p>“You really are a hell of an optimist, Roger,”
Alec observed wonderingly.</p>

<p>Their path took them past the library, and as
they reached the bed in which the footprints had
been discovered Roger instinctively paused. The
next moment he darted forward and stared with
incredulous eyes at the bed.</p>

<p>“Good Lord!” he exclaimed, clutching Alec’s
arm and pointing with an excited finger. “Look!
They’ve gone, both of them! They’ve been
smoothed out!”</p>

<p>“Great Scott, so they have!”</p>

<p>The two gazed at each other with wide eyes.</p>

<p>“So Jefferson <em>did</em> hear what we were talking
about!” Roger almost whispered. “I have an idea
that things are going to get rather exciting very
soon, after all.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch17">

<h2>CHAPTER XVII. <br/> Mr. Grierson Becomes Heated</h2>

<p>But however much Jefferson might guess of their
activities, certainly nothing was visible in his
manner as Roger and Alec entered the drawing
room, twenty minutes late for tea. He greeted them
in his usual curt, rather brusque way, and asked
casually how they had managed to amuse themselves.
Lady Stanworth was not present, and Mrs.
Plant was seated behind the tea tray.</p>

<p>“Oh, we went for a stroll through the village;
but it was too hot to be pleasant. Thanks, Mrs.
Plant. Yes, milk and sugar, please. Two lumps.
You got through your business in Elchester all
right? I saw you starting.”</p>

<p>“Yes. Got off infernally late. Had to rush things.
However, I managed to get everything done all
right.”</p>

<p>“Have they arranged about the inquest yet, by
the way?” Alec asked suddenly.</p>

<p>“Yes. To-morrow morning at eleven, here.”</p>

<p>“Oh, they’re going to hold it here, are they?”
said Roger. “Which room will you put them in?
The library?”</p>

<p>“No. I think the morning room’s better.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I think it is.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I do wish it were over!” Mrs. Plant
remarked with an involuntary sigh.</p>

<p>“You don’t seem to be looking forward to the
ordeal,” Roger said quickly, with a slight smile.</p>

<p>“I hate the idea of giving evidence,” Mrs. Plant
replied, almost passionately. “It’s horrible!”</p>

<p>“Oh, come. It isn’t as bad as all that. It’s not
like a law case, you know. There’ll be no
cross-examination, or anything like that. The
proceedings will be purely formal, I take it, eh, Jefferson?”</p>

<p>“Purely,” Jefferson said, lighting a cigarette
with deliberation. “Don’t suppose the whole thing
will last more than twenty minutes.”</p>

<p>“So you see there won’t be anything very
dreadful in it, Mrs. Plant. May I have another cup of
tea, please?”</p>

<p>“Well, I wish it were over; that’s all,” Mrs.
Plant said with a nervous little laugh, and Roger
noticed that the hand which held his cup shook
slightly.</p>

<p>Jefferson rose to his feet.</p>

<p>“Afraid I shall have to leave you chaps to your
own resources again,” he remarked abruptly.
“Lady Stanworth hopes you’ll do whatever you
like. Sorry to appear so inhospitable, but you
know what things are like at this sort of time.”</p>

<p>He walked out of the room.</p>

<p>Roger decided to put out a small feeler.</p>

<p>“Jefferson doesn’t seem extraordinarily upset
really, does he?” he said to Mrs. Plant. “Yet it
must be rather a shock to lose an employer, with
whom one’s been so many years, in this tragic
way.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant glanced at him, as if rather questioning
the good taste of this remark. “I don’t think
Major Jefferson is the sort of man to show his
real feelings before comparative strangers, do
you, Mr. Sheringham?” she replied a little stiffly.</p>

<p>“Probably not,” Roger replied easily. “But
he seems singularly unperturbed about it all.”</p>

<p>“He is a very imperturbable sort of person, I
imagine.”</p>

<p>Roger tried another tack. “Had you known Mr.
Stanworth long, Mrs. Plant?” he asked
conversationally, leaning back in his chair and pulling
his pipe out of his pocket. “You don’t mind if I
smoke, do you?”</p>

<p>“Please do. Oh, no; not very long. My—my
husband knew him, you know.”</p>

<p>“I see. A curious habit that of his, asking
comparative, or, in my case at any rate, complete
strangers down to these little gatherings, wasn’t
it?”</p>

<p>“I think Mr. Stanworth was a very hospitable
man,” Mrs. Plant replied tonelessly.</p>

<p>“Very! A most excellent fellow in every way,
didn’t you think?” Roger asked with enthusiasm.</p>

<p>“Oh, most,” said Mrs. Plant in a curiously flat
voice.</p>

<p>Roger glanced at her shrewdly. “You don’t
agree with me, Mrs. Plant?” he said suddenly.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant started.</p>

<p>“I?” she said hurriedly. “Why, of course I do.
I thought Mr. Stanworth a—a very nice man indeed.
Charming! Of course I agree with you.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I’m sorry. I thought for the moment that
you didn’t seem very enthusiastic about him. No
earthly reason why you should be, of course.
Everybody has their likes and dislikes, don’t
they?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant glanced quickly at Roger, and then
looked out of the window. “I was simply thinking
how—how tragic the whole thing is,” she said in a
low voice.</p>

<p>There was a short silence.</p>

<p>“Lady Stanworth didn’t seem to be on very
good terms with him, though, did she?” Roger
remarked carelessly, prodding at the tobacco in
his pipe with a match-stalk.</p>

<p>“Do you think so?” Mrs. Plant returned
guardedly.</p>

<p>“She certainly gave me that impression. In fact,
I should have gone farther. I should have said
that she positively disliked him.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant looked at the speaker with distaste.
“There are secrets in every household, I suppose,”
she said shortly. “Don’t you think that it is a
little impertinent for outsiders to probe into them?
Especially under circumstances like these.”</p>

<p>“That’s one for me,” Roger smiled, quite
unabashed. “Yes, I suppose it is, Mrs. Plant. The
trouble is, you see, that I simply can’t help it.
I’m the most curious person alive. Everything
interests me, especially every human thing, and
I’ve just got to get to the bottom of it. And you
must admit that the relations between Lady
Stanworth, of all people, and the—shall we
say?—somewhat plebeian Mr. Stanworth, are
uncommonly interesting to a novelist.”</p>

<p>“Everything is ‘copy’ to you, you mean?”
Mrs. Plant retorted, though less uncompromisingly.
“Well, if you put it like that I suppose you
may have a certain amount of reason; though I
don’t admit the justification for all that. Yes, I
believe Lady Stanworth did not get on very well
with her brother-in-law. After all, it’s only to be
expected, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>“Is it?” asked Roger quickly. “Why?”</p>

<p>“Well, because of the circumstances of——”
Mrs. Plant broke off abruptly and bit her lip.
“Because of the blood and water idea, I suppose.
They were utterly unlike each other in every way.”</p>

<p>“That isn’t what you were going to say. What
had you got in mind when you corrected yourself?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant flushed slightly.</p>

<p>“Really, Mr. Sheringham, I——”</p>

<p>Alec rose suddenly from his chair. “I say, it’s
awfully hot in this room,” he remarked abruptly.
“Come into the garden and get some air, Roger,
I’m sure Mrs. Plant will excuse us.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant flashed a grateful look at him.</p>

<p>“Certainly,” she said, in somewhat agitated
tones. “I—I think I shall go upstairs and lie down
for a little myself. I have rather a headache.”</p>

<p>The two men watched her go out of the room in
silence. Then Alec turned to Roger.</p>

<p>“Look here,” he said heatedly, “I’m not going
to let you bully that poor little woman like this.
It’s a bit too thick. You get a lot of damned silly
notions into your head about her, and then you
try to bully her into confirming them. I’m not
going to stand for it.”</p>

<p>Roger shook his head in mock despair.</p>

<p>“Really, Alexander,” he said tragically, “you
are a difficult person, you know. Extraordinarily
difficult.”</p>

<p>“Well, it’s getting past a joke,” Alec retorted a
little more calmly, though his face was still flushed
with anger. “We can do what we want without
bullying women.”</p>

<p>“And just when I was getting along so nicely!”
Roger mourned. “You make a rotten Watson,
Alec. I can’t think why I ever took you on in the
part.”</p>

<p>“A jolly good thing for you that you did,” Alec
said grimly. “I can see fair play, at any rate. And
trying to trick a woman who’s got nothing to do
with the thing at all into a lot of silly admissions
is <em>not</em> playing the game.”</p>

<p>Roger took the other’s arm and led him gently
into the garden.</p>

<p>“All right, all right,” he said in the tones of one
soothing a fractious child. “We’ll try other tactics,
if you’re so set on it. In any case, there’s no need
to get excited. The trouble is that you’ve mistaken
your century, Alec. You ought to have lived four
or five hundred years ago. As a heavy-weight
succourer of ladies in distress you could have
challenged all comers with one lance tied behind your
back. There, there!”</p>

<p>“Oh, it’s all very well for you to laugh,” returned
the slightly mollified Alec, “but I’m perfectly
right, and you know it. If we’re going on with this
thing, we’re not going to make use of any dashed
underhand sneaky little detective tricks. If it
comes to that, why don’t you tackle Jefferson, if
you’re so jolly keen on tackling someone?”</p>

<p>“For the simple reason that the excellent
Jefferson would certainly not give anything away, my
dear Alec; whereas there’s always the chance that
a woman will. But enough! We’ll confine ourselves
to sticks and stones, and leave the human element
out of account; or the feminine part of it, at any
rate. But for all that,” Roger added wistfully,
“I <em>would</em> like to know what’s going on amongst that
trio!”</p>

<p>“Humph!” Alec grunted disapprovingly.</p>

<p>They paced for a time in silence up and down the
edge of the lawn, which ran parallel with the back
of the house.</p>

<p>Roger’s thoughts were racing. The disappearance
of the footprints had caused him drastically to
rearrange his ideas. He had now no doubt at all
that Jefferson not only knew all about the crime
itself, but that he was in all probability an actual
participator in it. Whether his part had been an
active one and he had been present in the library
at the time, was impossible to say; probably not,
Roger inclined to think. But that he had helped
to plan it and was now actively concerned in
endeavouring to destroy all traces of it was surely
beyond all disbelief. That meant one accomplice,
at least, within the house.</p>

<p>But what was really worrying Roger far more
than the question of Jefferson’s share in the affair
was the possible inclusion of the two women who
seemed somehow to be mixed up with it. On the
face of things no doubt it was, as Alec so strongly
held, almost incredible that either Mrs. Plant or
Lady Stanworth could be a party to a murder. Yet
it was impossible to dispute the facts. That there
was a distinct understanding between Jefferson
and Lady Stanworth seemed as certain to Roger
as that there had been a murder in the house
instead of a suicide. And a similar understanding
between Mrs. Plant and Jefferson appeared to be
even more strongly established. Added to which
there was her suspicious behaviour in the library
that morning; for in spite of the fact that her
jewels had been in the safe, after all, Roger was still
no less firmly convinced that this excuse for her
presence in the library was a lie. Furthermore,
Mrs. Plant certainly knew very much more about
Stanworth and his relations with his secretary and
sister-in-law than she was willing to admit; it was
a pity that she had checked herself just in time
after tea, when she appeared to have been on the
point of allowing something of real importance to
slip past her guard.</p>

<p>Yes; though he was no more willing to believe it
than was Alec himself, Roger could see no loophole
through which to escape from the assumption
that both Mrs. Plant and Lady Stanworth were as
deeply implicated as Jefferson himself. It was most
unfortunate that Alec should have chosen to adopt
such a highly prejudiced view of the matter; this
was just the sort of thing for which nothing was
required so much as impartial discussion. Roger
covertly eyed the face of his taciturn companion
and sighed softly.</p>

<p>The back of the house did not run in a single
straight line. Between the library and the dining
room, where was the small room which was used
for storing trunks and lumber, the wall was set
back a few feet and formed a shallow recess; and
this space was occupied by a little shrubbery of
laurels. As the two passed this shrubbery, a small
blue object, lying on the ground at the outer edge,
caught the sun’s rays and the gleam of it attracted
Roger’s attention. Carelessly and half
unconsciously, he strolled towards it.</p>

<p>Then something in its particular shade of blue
struck a sudden note in his memory, and he stared
at it curiously.</p>

<p>“What’s that little blue thing by the roots of
those laurels, Alec?” he asked, frowning at it. “It
seems vaguely familiar somehow.”</p>

<p>He stepped across the path and picked it up.
It was a piece of blue china.</p>

<p>“Hullo!” he said eagerly, holding it up so that
Alec could see it. “Do you realise what this is?”</p>

<p>Alec joined him on the path and looked at the
piece of china without very much interest.</p>

<p>“Yes, it’s a bit of broken plate or something.”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, it isn’t! Don’t you recognise the colour?
It’s a bit of the missing vase, my boy. I wonder—— By
Jove, I wonder if the rest is in here.”</p>

<p>He dropped on his hands and knees and peered
among the laurels. “Yes, I believe I can see some
other bits farther in. I’ll investigate, if you’ll keep
an eye open to see that nobody is coming.” And he
crawled laboriously into the little shrubbery.</p>

<p>A few moments later he returned by the same
route. In his hands were several more pieces of the
vase.</p>

<p>“It’s all in there,” he announced triumphantly.
“Right back by the wall. You see what must have
happened?”</p>

<p>“The fellow threw it in there,” said Alec wisely.</p>

<p>“Exactly. I expect he put the pieces in his
pocket when he collected them, in order to chuck
them away somewhere as soon as he got clear.
Methodical sort of bird, isn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Alec agreed, looking at Roger with some
surprise. “You seem quite excited about it.”</p>

<p>“I am!” Roger said emphatically.</p>

<p>“Why? It’s what we expected, isn’t it? More or
less. I mean, if the vase was broken and the pieces
disappeared, it’s a pretty reasonable assumption
that he threw them away somewhere, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>Roger’s eyes sparkled. “Oh, perfectly. But the
point is <em>where</em> he threw them. Doesn’t it occur to
you, Alec, that this place is not on the route
between the lattice window and the quickest way
out of the grounds? In other words, the drive.
Also, doesn’t it occur to you that if he wanted to
throw them where nobody would be likely to find
them, the best place to do it would be that thick
undergrowth on either side of the drive—especially
as he would be passing along it on his way out?
Don’t those points seem rather significant to you?”</p>

<p>“Well, perhaps it is a little curious, now you
come to mention it.”</p>

<p>“A little curious!” Roger repeated disgustedly.
“My dear chap, it’s one of the most significant
things we’ve struck yet. What’s the inference?
I don’t say it’s correct, by the way. But what <em>is</em>
the inference?”</p>

<p>Alec pondered.</p>

<p>“That he was in a deuce of a hurry?”</p>

<p>“That he was in a deuce of a fiddlestick! He’d
have gone on straight down the drive if that is all.
No! The inference to my way of thinking is that
he never was going down the drive at all.”</p>

<p>“Oh? Where was he going, then?”</p>

<p>“Back into the house again! Alec, it’s beginning
to look as if that Mysterious Stranger of ours may
be going the same way as Mr. John Prince.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch18">

<h2>CHAPTER XVIII. <br/> What the Settee Had to Tell</h2>

<p>Alec stared incredulously. “Back into the <em>house</em>?
But—but what on earth would he want to be going
back into the house for?”</p>

<p>“Ah, now you’re asking me something. I haven’t
the least idea. I don’t even know that he was going
back into the house. All I say is that that is the
only inference I can draw from the fact of these
pieces of vase being where they are. It’s possibly
quite wrong.”</p>

<p>“But look here, if he wanted to go into the
house again, why on earth should he have taken
the trouble to climb out of the window like that?
Why didn’t he just go out of the library door?”</p>

<p>“Obviously because he wanted to leave all ways
into or out of the library fastened on the inside, in
order to further the idea of suicide.”</p>

<p>“But why should he have gone back into the
house at all? That’s what I can’t understand.”</p>

<p>“Well,” Roger remarked very casually,
“supposing he lived there?”</p>

<p>“<em>What?</em>”</p>

<p>“I said, supposing he lived there. He’d want to
go up to bed, wouldn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Good Lord, you’re surely not suggesting that
somebody in the house murdered old Stanworth,
are you?” Alec asked in horrified tones.</p>

<p>Roger relit his pipe with some care.</p>

<p>“Not necessarily, but you keep asking me why
he should want to get back into the house, and I
give you the most obvious explanation. As a
matter of fact, I should say that he probably
wanted to communicate with somebody inside
before making his escape.”</p>

<p>“Then you don’t think it was somebody from
inside the house who killed Stanworth?” Alec
asked with some relief.</p>

<p>“Heaven only knows,” Roger replied
laconically. “No, perhaps on second thoughts I don’t.
We mustn’t forget that Jefferson couldn’t find those
keys this morning. Unless that was a blind, by
Jove! I never thought of that. Or he might have
forgotten something important and wanted to get
at the safe again, not realising that he’d put the
keys back in the wrong pocket.”</p>

<p>“I suppose,” Alec said slowly, “that Jefferson
is the only person inside the house that you would
suspect of having done it?”</p>

<p>“No, I’m hanged if he is,” Roger retorted with
energy.</p>

<p>“Oh! Who else then?”</p>

<p>“I’m suspecting everybody at present; put it
like that. Everybody and everything within these
four walls.”</p>

<p>“Well, look here, don’t forget your promise,
mind. No decisive steps to be taken without me,
eh?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but look here, Alec,” Roger said seriously,
“you really mustn’t stand out unnecessarily if I
might want to take steps that don’t altogether
meet with your approval. We’re playing a very
grave game, you know, and we can’t treat it as a
joy-trip and only do the bits we like and leave out
all the nasty part.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” Alec said, a little reluctantly. “I see
that. I won’t make a fuss about anything
unnecessarily. But we must go on working together.”</p>

<p>“Right!” Roger answered promptly. “That’s
a bargain, then. Well, look here, there’s one thing
we ought to have done earlier, but it quite slipped
my memory. We must have a look for that possible
second cartridge case. Personally I don’t believe
there is one; I think there was one shot fired from
each revolver. But it’s a possibility, and we ought
not to overlook it.”</p>

<p>“Rather a tall order, isn’t it? It might be
anywhere in the whole grounds.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but there’s only one place that it’s any
use to search—the library. If we can’t find it there,
we’ll give it up.”</p>

<p>“Very well.”</p>

<p>“Oh, Alexander,” Roger observed unhappily,
as they strolled back to the library. “Alexander,
we’re very terribly handicapped in this little
problem, as Holmes would call it.”</p>

<p>“In what way particularly?”</p>

<p>“Not knowing the motive for the murder. If
we could only get at that, it would simplify
matters tremendously. Why, I dare say we could put
our hands on the criminal at once. That’s the way
all these murder cases are solved, both in real life
and in fiction. Establish your motive, and work
back from that. We’re groping utterly in the dark,
you see, till we’ve found that.”</p>

<p>“And you haven’t any idea of it at all? Not
even a guess?”</p>

<p>“Not a one. Or, rather, too many. It’s impossible
to say with a man like Stanworth. After all, what
do we know about him, beyond that he was a
cheery old gentleman and kept an excellent cellar?
Nothing! He might have been a lady-killer, and
it may be a case of the jealous husband, with Lady
Stanworth and Jefferson in the know after it had
happened, and hushing it up for the sake of the
name.”</p>

<p>“I say, that’s a good idea! Do you really think
it was that? I shouldn’t be a bit surprised.”</p>

<p>“It’s possible, but I shouldn’t say it was likely.
He was rather too old to be acting as Lothario,
wasn’t he? Or again it might have been somebody
whom he ruined in business (I shouldn’t say his
methods were any too scrupulous) and a somewhat
drastic revenge, with the other two also knowing
what had happened and keeping quiet about it for
reasons that we don’t know anything about. But
what’s the use? There are a hundred theories, all
equally possible and plausible, to fit the very
meagre array of facts that we’ve got in our
possession.”</p>

<p>“We are in a bit of a fog, yes,” Alec agreed as
they entered the library.</p>

<p>“But there’s rather more light I think, already,
than an hour or two ago,” Roger replied cheerfully.
“No, when all’s said and done, we haven’t done so
badly as yet, what with luck and certain other
things which modesty forbids me to mention.
And now for this cartridge case, and let’s pray
that we shan’t be interrupted.”</p>

<p>For some minutes they searched diligently in
silence. Then Alec scrambled up from his knees
beside the little typist’s table and inspected his
hands ruefully.</p>

<p>“No sign of it,” he said, “and I’m in a filthy
mess. I don’t think it can be in here, do you?”</p>

<p>Roger was investigating the cushions of the big
settee.</p>

<p>“Afraid not,” he replied. “I hardly expected it,
but—— Hullo, what’s this?”</p>

<p>He drew out a small piece of white material from
between two of the loose cushions and inspected it
with interest.</p>

<p>Alec strolled across the room and joined him.
“It looks like a woman’s handkerchief,” he said
carefully.</p>

<p>“More than that, Alexander; it <em>is</em> a woman’s
handkerchief. Now what on earth is a woman’s
handkerchief doing in Stanworth’s library?”</p>

<p>“I expect she left it here,” Alec remarked wisely.</p>

<p>“Alec, this is positive genius! I see it all now.
She must have left it here. And there was I
thinking that she’d sent it by post, with special
instructions for it to be placed between those cushions in
case she ever wanted to find it there!”</p>

<p>“You are funny, aren’t you?” Alec growled
wearily.</p>

<p>“Occasionally,” Roger admitted modestly,
“quite. But reverting to the handkerchief, I
wonder whether this is going to prove rather important.
What do you think?”</p>

<p>“How could it?”</p>

<p>“I’m not quite sure yet, but I have a sort of
feeling. It all depends on several things. Whose
handkerchief it is, for instance, and when this
settee was tidied up last, and when the owner of
the handkerchief admits she was in here last,
and—— Oh, quite a large number of things.” He
sniffed at the handkerchief delicately. “H’m! I
seem to know that scent, at all events.”</p>

<p>“You do?” Alec asked eagerly. “Who uses it?”</p>

<p>“That unfortunately I don’t appear to
remember for the moment,” Roger confessed reluctantly.
“Still, we ought to be able to find that out with a
few discreet inquiries.”</p>

<p>He put the handkerchief carefully in his breast
pocket, crumpling it into a small ball so as to
retain as much of the scent as possible.</p>

<p>“But I think the first thing to do,” he continued,
when it was safely bestowed, “is to examine this
settee rather more minutely. You never know what
you’re going to find, apparently.”</p>

<p>Without disturbing the cushions further, he
began a careful scrutiny of the back and arms. It
was not long before he found himself rewarded.</p>

<p>“Look!” he exclaimed suddenly, pointing at a
place on the left arm. “Powder! See? Face powder,
for a sovereign. Now I wonder what on earth that’s
got to tell us, if we only know how to read it.”</p>

<p>Alec bent and examined the place. A very faint
smudge of white powder stood out upon the black
surface of the cloth.</p>

<p>“You’re sure that’s face powder?” he asked, a
little incredulously. “How can you tell?”</p>

<p>“I can’t,” Roger admitted cheerfully. “It might
be French chalk. But I’m sure it is face powder.
Let me see, face powder just on the inner curve of
the arm; what does that mean? Or talking about
arms, perhaps it’s arm powder. They do powder
their arms, don’t they?”</p>

<p>“<em>I</em> don’t know. Probably.”</p>

<p>“Well, you ought to,” Roger said severely.
“You’re engaged, aren’t you?”</p>

<p>“No,” Alec replied mournfully. After all, Roger
would have to know some time that the
engagement had been broken off.</p>

<p>Roger stared at him in amazement. “<em>No?</em> But
you got engaged to Barbara yesterday, didn’t
you?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Alec, still more mournfully. “But
we broke it off to-day. Or postponed it, rather, It
may be on again in a month or so, I hope.”</p>

<p>“But why, in the name of goodness?”</p>

<p>“Oh, for—for certain reasons,” Alec said lamely.
“We decided it was the best thing to do.
Er—private reasons, you know.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord, I’m awfully sorry to hear it, old
man,” said Roger genuinely. “I hope things will
come all right for you in the end; and if there’s
anything in the world that I can do, you know
you’ve only got to say the word. There isn’t a
couple anywhere that I’d sooner see fixed up than
you and Barbara. You’re quite the nicest two
people <em>I</em> know.” Roger was in the habit of
disregarding the convention that a man should never
under any circumstances display emotion in the
presence of another man, just as heartily as he
violated all other conventions.</p>

<p>Alec flushed with pleasure. “Thanks awfully,
old chap,” he said gruffly. “I knew I could rely on
you. But really, there isn’t anything you could
possibly do. And things will come out all right, I
feel sure.”</p>

<p>“Well, I sincerely hope so, or I’ll wring young
Barbara’s neck for her,” said Roger; and both men
knew that the topic was closed, until or unless Alec
himself chose to reopen it.</p>

<p>“And about this powder?” Alec prompted.</p>

<p>“Ah, yes. I hadn’t finished with the settee, had
I? Well, let’s see if there’s anything more to be
found first.”</p>

<p>He bent over the couch again, only to look up
the next instant.</p>

<p>“See this?” he said, indicating a long fair hair
in the angle between the arm and the back.
“There <em>has</em> been a woman sitting here recently. This
confirms the face powder. What an extraordinarily
lucky thing that we thought of searching the place
for that cartridge case. It would never have done
to have missed this. I have an idea that this woman
is going to be more useful to us than fifty cartridge
cases.” And taking a letter out of his pocket he
drew out the sheet of paper and carefully placed
the hair in the envelope. “They always do this in
books,” he explained, observing Alec’s interested
gaze, “so I suppose it’s the right thing to do.”</p>

<p>“And what are you going to do next?” Alec
asked, as the envelope followed the handkerchief
into Roger’s breast pocket. “You’ve only got about
half an hour before dinner time, you know.”</p>

<p>“Yes. I’m going to try and find out if I can when
this settee was last tidied up; that seems to me
the point on which everything depends. After that
I’ve got to spot the owner of the handkerchief.”</p>

<p>“By the scent? There are no initials on it.”</p>

<p>“By the scent. This is the sort of occasion
when being a dog must come in so useful,” Roger
added reflectively.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch19">

<h2>CHAPTER XIX. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Loses and Wins the Same Bet</h2>

<p>At the top of the stairs the two parted, Alec going
to his own room and Roger to his. Arrived there,
the latter did not proceed immediately with his
changing; for some moments he leaned, deep in
thought, on the window-sill overlooking the
garden. Then, as if he had come to a decision, he
crossed the room briskly and rang the bell.</p>

<p>A cheerful, plump young person answered it and
smiled questioningly. Roger was always a favourite
with servants; if not always with gardeners.</p>

<p>“Oh, hullo, Alice. I say, I seem to have lost my
fountain pen. You haven’t seen it about anywhere,
have you?”</p>

<p>The girl shook her head. “No, sir, that I haven’t.
It wasn’t in here when I did the room this morning,
I’m sure.”</p>

<p>“H’m! That’s a nuisance. I’ve missed it since
last night. The last time I remember having it was
in the library a short time before dinner. I wonder
if I can have left it in there. Do you do the library?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no, sir. I only do the bedrooms. Mary does
the downstairs rooms.”</p>

<p>“I see. Well, do you think I could have a word
with Mary, if she’s not too busy? Perhaps you could
send her up here?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir. I’ll tell her at once.”</p>

<p>“Thank you, Alice.”</p>

<p>In due course Mary made her appearance.</p>

<p>“I say, Mary,” Roger remarked confidentially,
“I’ve lost my fountain pen, and Alice tells me that
she hasn’t come across it in here. Now the last
time I had it was in the library yesterday, some
time between tea and dinner; I’ve been looking
round for it in there, but I can’t see it. I suppose
you haven’t tidied up the library since then, or
seen anything of it?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, I tidied up the library last night while
they were in at dinner. And little did I think when
I was doing it that——”</p>

<p>“Yes, quite so,” Roger put in soothingly.
“Shocking business! But what did the tidying up
consist of, Mary? I mean, if it was only cursory
you might not have noticed the pen. What did you
do exactly?”</p>

<p>“Well, sir, I put the chairs straight and tidied
up the cigarette ends in the hearth and emptied
the ashtrays.”</p>

<p>“What about the settee? I remember sitting on
the settee with the pen in my hand.”</p>

<p>“It wasn’t there then, sir,” Mary said with
decision. “I took up all the cushions and shook
them, and there wasn’t anything there. I should
have noticed it if there had been.”</p>

<p>“I see. You did the settee quite thoroughly, in
fact? Brushed it, and all that sort of thing?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir. I always run a brush over the settee
and the armchairs of an evening. They get so
terribly dusty with all those windows, and that
black rep shows the dust up something awful.”</p>

<p>“Well, thank you, Mary. I suppose I must have
left it somewhere else, after all. By the way, you
haven’t done the library at all to-day, have you?”</p>

<p>“No, sir,” Mary replied with a little shiver.
“Nor wouldn’t like to; not alone, at all events.
Creepy, I should call it, sir, with that poor
gentleman sitting there all night like a——”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” said Roger with mechanical haste.
“Shocking! Well, I’m sorry to have brought you
all this way for nothing, Mary; but if you ever
come across it, you might let me know.”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir,” Mary said with a pleasant smile.
“Thank you, sir.”</p>

<p>“And that is that!” Roger murmured
confidentially to the closing door.</p>

<p>He completed his changing as rapidly as possible
and, hurrying along to Alec’s room, recounted the
facts he had just learnt.</p>

<p>“So you see,” he concluded, “that woman must
have been in the library some time after dinner.
Now who was it? Barbara was with you in the
garden, of course; so she’s out of the running.
That leaves Mrs. Shannon, Mrs. Plant, and Lady
Stanworth—if it <em>was</em> somebody in the house, by
the way,” he added thoughtfully. “I never thought
of that.”</p>

<p>Alec paused in the act of tying his black tie to
look round interrogatively.</p>

<p>“But what’s all this getting at?” he asked. “Is
there any particular reason why one of those three
shouldn’t have been in the library yesterday
evening?”</p>

<p>“No, not exactly. But it rather depends on who
it is. If it was Lady Stanworth, for instance, I
shouldn’t say there was anything in it; unless she
specifically denied that she went into the library
at all. On the other hand, if it was someone from
outside the household it might be decidedly
important. Oh, it’s too vague to explain, but what I feel
is that this is the emergence of a new fact—the
presence of a woman in the library yesterday
evening. And a woman sitting down at that, not just
passing through. Therefore, like every other fact
in the case, it has got to be investigated. It may
turn out to be absolutely in order. On the other
hand, it may not. That’s all.”</p>

<p>“It’s certainly vague, as you say,” Alec
commented, fastening his waistcoat. “And when do
you expect to spot the woman?”</p>

<p>“Possibly the end of dinner. I shall sniff
delicately and unobtrusively at Lady Stanworth and
Mrs. Plant, and if it isn’t either of them, it may
be Mrs. Shannon. If that’s the case, of course
there’s no importance to be attached to it at all;
but if it isn’t any of them, I don’t know what I
shall do. I can’t go dashing all over the county,
sniffing at strange women, can I? It might lead to
all sorts of awkward complications. Hurry up,
Alexander, the bell went at least five minutes ago.”</p>

<p>“I’m ready,” Alec said, glancing at his well-flattened
hair in the mirror with approval. “Lead
on.”</p>

<p>The others were already waiting for them when
they arrived in the drawing room, and the party
went in to dinner at once. Lady Stanworth was
present, to all appearances unmoved, but even
more silent than usual; and her presence laid an
added constraint on the little gathering.</p>

<p>Roger tried hard to keep the ball rolling, and
both Mrs. Plant and Jefferson did their best in
their respective ways to second him, but Alec for
some reason was almost as quiet as his hostess.
Glancing now and again at his preoccupied face,
Roger concluded that the rôle of amateur detective
was proving highly uncongenial to that
uncompromisingly straightforward young man. Probably
the introduction of this new feminine question
regarding the ownership of the handkerchief was
upsetting him again.</p>

<p>“Did you notice,” Roger remarked casually,
addressing himself to Jefferson, “when the
inspector was questioning us this morning, how very
difficult it is to remember the things that have
occurred, even only twenty-four hours before, if they
were not sufficiently important to impress one in
any way?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know what you mean,” Jefferson agreed.
“Noticed it often myself.”</p>

<p>Roger glanced at him curiously. It was a strange
position, this sort of armed and forced friendliness
between Jefferson and himself. If the former had
heard much of that conversation by the lattice
window, he must know Roger for his enemy; and in
any case the disappearance of the footprint showed
that he was thoroughly on his guard. Yet not the
faintest trace of this appeared in his manner. He
behaved towards both of them exactly as he always
had done; no more and no less. Roger could not
help admiring the man’s nerve.</p>

<p>“Especially as regards movements,” he resumed
conversationally. “I often have the very greatest
trouble in remembering exactly where I was at a
certain time. Last night wasn’t so difficult, because
I was in the garden from the end of dinner till I
went up to bed. But take your case, for instance,
Lady Stanworth. I’m prepared to bet quite a
reasonable sum that you couldn’t say, without
stopping to think, exactly what rooms you visited
yesterday evening between the end of dinner and
going up to bed.”</p>

<p>Out of the tail of his eye Roger noticed a quick
look flash between Lady Stanworth and Jefferson.
It was as if the latter had warned her of the
possibility of a trap.</p>

<p>“Then I am afraid you would lose your bet, Mr.
Sheringham,” she replied calmly, after a
momentary pause. “I remember perfectly. From the
dining room I went into the drawing room, where I sat
for about half an hour. Then I went into the
morning room to discuss certain of the accounts
with Major Jefferson, and after that I went
upstairs.”</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s altogether too easy,” Roger laughed.
“It’s not playing fair. You ought to have visited
far more rooms than that to make the game a
success. What about you, then, Mrs. Plant? Shall I
transfer the bet to you?”</p>

<p>“You’d lose again if you did,” Mrs. Plant
smiled. “I was only in one room, worse still. I
stayed in the drawing room the whole time till I
met you in the hall on my way upstairs. There!
What was the bet, by the way?”</p>

<p>“I shall have to think of that. A handkerchief,
I think, don’t you? Yes, I owe you a handkerchief.”</p>

<p>“What a poor little bet!” Mrs. Plant laughed.
“I wouldn’t have taken it if I’d known it was
going to be so unremunerative.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’ll throw in a bottle of scent to go with
it, shall I?”</p>

<p>“That would be better, certainly.”</p>

<p>“Better stop there, Sheringham,” Jefferson put
in. “She’ll have got on to gloves before you know
where you are.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I’m drawing the line at scent. What’s your
favourite brand, by the way, Mrs. Plant?”</p>

<p>“<i lang="fr">Amour des Fleurs</i>,” Mrs. Plant replied
promptly. “A guinea a bottle!”</p>

<p>“Oh! Remember, I’m only a poor author.”</p>

<p>“Well, you asked for my favourite, so I told you.
But that isn’t the one I generally use.”</p>

<p>“Ah, now we’re getting warmer. Something
about elevenpence a bottle is more like my mark.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid you’ll have to pay just a little more
than that. <i lang="fr">Parfum Jasmine</i>; nine and sixpence.
And it will serve you right.”</p>

<p>“I shan’t bet with <em>you</em> again, Mrs. Plant,”
Roger retorted with mock severity. “I hate people
who win bets against me. It isn’t fair.”</p>

<p>For the rest of dinner Roger seemed to be a little
preoccupied.</p>

<p>As soon as the ladies had left the room, he strolled
over to the open French windows which, like those
of the library on the other side, led out on to the
lawn.</p>

<p>“I think a smoke in the open air is indicated,”
he observed carelessly. “Coming, Alec? What
about you, Jefferson?”</p>

<p>“No rest for me, I’m afraid,” Jefferson replied
with a smile. “I’m up to the eyes in it.”</p>

<p>“Straightening things up?”</p>

<p>“Trying to; they’re in a dreadful muddle.”</p>

<p>“Finances, you mean?”</p>

<p>“Yes, that and everything. He always managed
his own affairs and this is the first time I’ve seen
his passbooks and the rest. As he appeared to have
accounts at no less than five different banks, you
can understand something of what I’ve got to
wade through.” Jefferson’s manner was perfectly
friendly and open, almost frank.</p>

<p>“That’s funny. I wonder why he did that. And
have you found any reason for his killing himself?”</p>

<p>“None,” said Jefferson candidly. “In fact, the
whole thing absolutely beats me. It’s the last thing
you’d have expected of old Stanworth, if you’d
known him as well as I did.”</p>

<p>“You knew him pretty well, of course?” Roger
asked, applying a match to his cigarette.</p>

<p>“I should say so. I was with him longer than I
like to remember,” Jefferson replied with a little
laugh that sounded somewhat bitter to Roger’s
suspicious ears.</p>

<p>“What sort of a man was he really? I thought
him quite a good sort; but then I’d probably only
seen one side of him.”</p>

<p>“Oh, everyone has their different sides, don’t
they?” Jefferson parried. “I don’t suppose
Stanworth was very unlike anyone else.”</p>

<p>“Why did he employ an ex-prize-fighter as a
butler?” Roger asked suddenly, looking the other
straight in the face.</p>

<p>But Jefferson was not to be caught off his guard.</p>

<p>“Oh, a whim I should think,” he said easily.
“He had plenty of whims like that.”</p>

<p>“It seems funny to meet with a butler called
Graves in real life,” Roger said with a little smile.
“They’re always called Graves on the stage, aren’t
they?”</p>

<p>“Oh, that isn’t his real name. He’s really called
Bill Higgins, I believe. Mr. Stanworth couldn’t
face the name of Higgins, so he called him Graves
instead.”</p>

<p>“It’s a pity. Higgins is an admirably original
name for a butler. Besides, it harmonises much
more with the gentleman’s general air of
ruggedness, doesn’t it? Well, what about this breath of
air we promised ourselves, Alec? See you later no
doubt, Jefferson.”</p>

<p>Jefferson nodded amicably, and the two strolled
out on to the lawn. It was only just beginning to
get dusk, and the light was still strong.</p>

<p>“I’ve found out who the handkerchief belongs
to, Alec,” Roger said in a low voice.</p>

<p>“Have you? Who?”</p>

<p>“Mrs. Plant. I was almost certain before we sat
down to dinner, but what she said clinched it.
That scent is jasmine right enough.”</p>

<p>“And what are you going to do?”</p>

<p>Roger hesitated. “Well, you heard what she
said,” he replied, almost apologetically. “She
didn’t actually deny it, because I never asked her;
but she wouldn’t admit to being in the library at
all yesterday evening.”</p>

<p>“But surely it’s a perfectly innocent thing to
be in the library?” Alec protested. “Why,
Stanworth wasn’t even there. He was out in the garden
with you. Why shouldn’t she have been in the
library?”</p>

<p>“And, equally, why shouldn’t she acknowledge
it?” Roger retorted quickly.</p>

<p>“It may have slipped her memory. That’s
nothing. You were saying yourself how difficult it is to
remember exactly where one’s been.”</p>

<p>“It’s no use, Alec,” Roger said gently. “We’ve
got to clear this up. It may be innocent enough;
I only hope it is! On the other hand, it may be
exceedingly important for us to find out just
exactly why Mrs. Plant was in that library, and
what she was doing there. You must see that we
can’t leave it as it is.”</p>

<p>“But what do you propose to do? Tackle her
about it?”</p>

<p>“Yes. I’m going to ask her point-blank if she
was in the library last night or not, and see what
she says.”</p>

<p>“And if she denies it?”</p>

<p>Roger shrugged his shoulders. “That remains
to be seen,” he said shortly.</p>

<p>“I don’t like it,” Alec frowned. “In fact, I hate
it. It’s a beastly position. Look here, Roger,” he
said with sudden earnestness, “let’s chuck the
whole thing! Let’s assume, as the police are doing,
that old Stanworth committed suicide and leave it
at that. Shall we?”</p>

<p>“You bet we won’t!” Roger said grimly. “I’m
not going to leave a thing half threshed out like
that; especially not such an interesting thing as
this. You can back out if you like; there’s no reason
for you to be mixed up with it if you don’t want.
But I’m most decidedly going on with it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, if you do, I shall, too,” Alec replied
gloomily. “But I’d much rather we both chucked it.”</p>

<p>“That’s out of the question,” Roger said briskly.
“Couldn’t dream of it. Well, if you’re going to
stick to it with me, you’d better be present at my
chat with Mrs. Plant. Let’s stroll round to the
drawing room and see if we can find an excuse to
speak with her alone.”</p>

<p>“All right, then,” Alec agreed unhappily. “If
we must.”</p>

<p>Luck was on their side. Mrs. Plant was alone in
the drawing room. Roger drew a chair up so as to
face her squarely and commented casually on Lady
Stanworth’s absence. Alec turned his back on them
and gazed moodily out of the window, as if washing
his hands of the whole affair.</p>

<p>“Lady Stanworth?” Mrs. Plant repeated. “Oh,
she’s gone in to help Major Jefferson, I think. In
the morning room.”</p>

<p>Roger looked at her steadily. “Mrs. Plant,” he
said in a low voice, “you’re quite certain you won
that bet of ours at dinner, aren’t you?”</p>

<p>“Certain?” asked Mrs. Plant uneasily. “Of
course I am. Why?”</p>

<p>“You didn’t forget any room that you went into
yesterday evening by any chance?” Roger pursued
firmly. “The morning room, the storeroom,
or—the library, for instance?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant stared at him with wide eyes. “What
do you mean, Mr. Sheringham?” she asked in
somewhat heightened tones. “Of course I didn’t
forget.”</p>

<p>“You went into none of those rooms, then?”</p>

<p>“Certainly not!”</p>

<p>“H’m! The bet was a bottle of scent and a
handkerchief, wasn’t it?” Roger remarked musingly,
feeling in his pocket. “Well, here’s the
handkerchief. I found it where you left it—on the couch in
the library!”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch20">

<h2>CHAPTER XX. <br/> Mrs. Plant Proves Disappointing</h2>

<p>For a moment Mrs. Plant sat perfectly rigid.
Then she put out her hand and mechanically took
the handkerchief that Roger was still holding out
to her. Her face had gone quite white and her eyes
were wide with terror.</p>

<p>“Please don’t be alarmed,” said Roger gently,
touching her hand reassuringly. “I don’t want to
frighten you, or anything like that; but don’t you
think it would be better if you told me the truth?
You might get into very serious trouble with the
police, you know, if it came out that you had been
concealing any important fact. Really, I only want
to help you, Mrs. Plant.”</p>

<p>The colour drained back into her face at that,
though her breath still came in gasps and she
continued to stare at him fearfully.</p>

<p>“But—but it wasn’t anything—important,” she
said jerkily. “It was only——” She paused again.</p>

<p>“Don’t tell me if you’d rather not, of course,”
Roger said quickly. “But I can’t help feeling that
I might be able to advise you. It’s a serious matter
to mislead the police, even in the most trivial
details. Take your time and think it over.” He rose
to his feet and joined Alec at the window.</p>

<p>When Mrs. Plant spoke again, her composure
was largely restored.</p>

<p>“Really,” she said, with a nervous little laugh,
“it’s absurd for me to make such a fuss over a trifle,
but I have got a horror of giving evidence—morbid,
if you like, but none the less genuine. So I
tried to minimise my last conversation with Mr.
Stanworth as much as possible, in the hope that
the police would attach so little importance to it
that they wouldn’t call on me to give evidence.”</p>

<p>Roger seated himself on the arm of a chair and
swung his leg carelessly.</p>

<p>“But you’ll be called in any case, so why not tell
exactly what happened?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but—but I didn’t know that then, you
see; not when I made my statement. I didn’t think
they’d call me at all then. Or I hoped they
wouldn’t.”</p>

<p>“I see. Still, I think it would be better not to
conceal anything as things are, don’t you?”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes. I quite see that now. Quite. It’s very
good of you to help me like this, Mr. Sheringham.
When—when did you find my handkerchief?”</p>

<p>“Just before I went up to change for dinner.
It was between two of those loose cushions on the
couch.”</p>

<p>“So you knew I must have been in the library?
But how did you know what time I was there?”</p>

<p>“I didn’t. In fact, I don’t know,” Roger smiled.
“All I know is that it must have been after dinner,
because the maid always tidies the room at that
time.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant nodded slowly. “I see. Yes, that was
clever of you. I didn’t leave anything else there,
did I?” she added, again with that nervous little
laugh.</p>

<p>“No, nothing else,” Roger replied smoothly.
“Well, have you thought it over?”</p>

<p>“Oh, of course I’ll tell you, Mr. Sheringham.
It’s really too ridiculous. You remember when you
passed us in the hall? Well, Mr. Stanworth was
speaking to me about some roses he’d had sent up
to my room. And then I asked him if he’d put my
jewels in his safe for me, as I——”</p>

<p>“But I thought you said this morning that you
asked him that the other day?” Roger interrupted.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant laughed lightly. She was quite
herself again.</p>

<p>“Yes, I did; and I told the inspector it was
yesterday morning. Wasn’t it dreadful of me?
That’s why I was so upset when you told me this
afternoon that I should have to give evidence. I
was so afraid they’d ask me a lot of questions and
find out that I was in the library, after all, when I
hadn’t said anything about it, and that I had told
the inspector a lie about the jewels. In fact, you
frightened me terribly, Mr. Sheringham. I had
dreadful visions of passing the rest of my days in
prison for telling fibs to the police.”</p>

<p>“I’m very sorry,” Roger smiled. “But I didn’t
know, did I?”</p>

<p>“Of course you didn’t. It was my own fault.
Well, anyhow, Mr. Stanworth very kindly said he’d
be delighted to put them away safely for me, so I
ran upstairs to get them and brought them down
into the library. Then I sat on the couch and
watched him put them in the safe. That’s all that
happened really, and I quite see now how absurd
it was of me to conceal it.”</p>

<p>“H’m!” said Roger thoughtfully. “Well, it
certainly isn’t vastly important in any case, is it?
And that’s all?”</p>

<p>“Every bit!” Mrs. Plant replied firmly. “Now
what do you advise me to do? Admit that I made
a mistake when I was with the inspector and tell
the truth? Or just say nothing about it? It may
be very silly of me, but I really can’t see that it
makes the least difference either way. The incident
is of no importance at all.”</p>

<p>“Still, it’s best to be on the safe side, I think.
If I were you I should take the inspector aside
before the proceedings open to-morrow and tell
him frankly that you made a mistake, and that
you took your jewels in to Mr. Stanworth in the
library last night before saying good-night to him.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant made a wry face. “Very well,” she
said reluctantly, “I will. It’s horrid to have to
admit that one was wrong; but you’re probably
right. Anyhow, I’ll do that.”</p>

<p>“I think you’re wise,” Roger replied, getting
to his feet again. “Well, Alec, what about that
stroll of ours? I’m afraid it will have to be a
moonlit one now.” He paused in the doorway and turned
back. “Good-night, Mrs. Plant, if I don’t see you
again; I expect you will be turning in fairly early.
Sleep well, and don’t let things worry you,
whatever you do.”</p>

<p>“I’ll try not to,” she smiled back. “Good-night,
Mr. Sheringham, and thank you very much
indeed.” And she heaved a heartfelt sigh of relief
as she watched his disappearing back.</p>

<p>The two made their way out on to the lawn in
silence.</p>

<p>“Hullo,” Roger remarked, as they reached the
big cedar, “they’ve left the chairs out here. Let’s
take advantage of them.”</p>

<p>“Well?” Alec demanded gruffly when they were
seated, disapproval written large in every line of
him. “Well? I hope you’re satisfied now.”</p>

<p>Roger pulled his pipe out of his pocket and filled
it methodically, gazing thoughtfully into the soft
darkness as he did so.</p>

<p>“Satisfied?” he repeated at last. “Well, hardly.
What do you think?”</p>

<p>“I think you scared that wretched woman out
of her wits for absolutely nothing at all. I told
you ages ago you were making a mistake about
her.”</p>

<p>“You’re a very simple-minded young man I’m
afraid, Alec,” Roger said, quite regretfully.</p>

<p>“Why, you surely don’t mean to say you
disbelieve her?” Alec asked in astonishment.</p>

<p>“H’m! I wouldn’t necessarily say that.
She <em>may</em> have been speaking the truth.”</p>

<p>“That’s awfully good of you,” Alec commented
sarcastically.</p>

<p>“But the trouble is that she certainly wasn’t
speaking the whole of it. She’s got something up
her sleeve, has that lady, whatever you choose to
think, Alec. Didn’t you notice how she tried to
pump me? How did I know what time she’d been
in there? Had she left anything else there? When
did I find the handkerchief? No, her explanation
sounds perfectly reasonable, I admit, as far as it
goes. But it doesn’t go nearly far enough. It doesn’t
explain the powder on the arm of the couch, for
instance; and I noticed at dinner that she doesn’t
powder her arms. But there’s one thing above all
that it leaves entirely out of the reckoning.”</p>

<p>“Oh?” Alec asked ironically. “And what may
that be?”</p>

<p>“The fact that she was crying when she was in
the library,” Roger replied simply.</p>

<p>“How on earth do you know that?” said the
dumbfounded Alec.</p>

<p>“Because the handkerchief was just slightly
damp when I found it. Also it was rolled up in a
tight little ball, as women do when they cry.”</p>

<p>“Oh!” said Alec blankly.</p>

<p>“So you see there is still a lot for which Mrs.
Plant did most certainly not account, isn’t there?
As to what she did say, it may be true or it may
be not. In gist I should say that it was. There’s
only one thing that I’m really doubtful about, and
that’s the time when she said she was in the
library.”</p>

<p>“What makes you doubt that?”</p>

<p>“Well, in the first place I didn’t hear her come
upstairs immediately to fetch her jewels, as I
almost certainly should have done. And, secondly,
didn’t you notice that she carefully asked me if I
knew what time she was there, before she gave a
time at all? In other words, after I had let out like
an idiot that I didn’t know what time she was
there, she realised that she could say what time
she liked, and as long as it didn’t clash with any of
the known facts (such as Stanworth being out in
the garden with me) it would be all right.”</p>

<p>“Splitting hairs?” Alec murmured laconically.</p>

<p>“Possibly; but nice, thick, easily splittable
ones.”</p>

<p>For a time they smoked in silence, each engaged
with his own thoughts. Then:</p>

<p>“Who would you say was the older, Alec,”
Roger asked suddenly, “Lady Stanworth or Mrs.
Shannon?”</p>

<p>“Mrs. Shannon,” Alec replied without
hesitation. “Why?”</p>

<p>“I was just wondering. But Lady Stanworth
looks older; her hair is getting quite gray. Mrs.
Shannon’s is still brown.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know Mrs. Shannon looks the younger
of the two; but I’m sure she’s not, for all that.”</p>

<p>“Well, what age would you put Jefferson at?”</p>

<p>“Lord, I don’t know. He might be any age.
About the same as Lady Stanworth, I should
imagine. What on earth are you asking all this
for?”</p>

<p>“Oh, just something that was passing through
my mind. Nothing very important.”</p>

<p>They relapsed into silence once more.</p>

<p>Suddenly Roger slapped his knee. “By Jove!”
he ejaculated. “I wonder if we dare!”</p>

<p>“What’s up now?”</p>

<p>“I’ve just had a brain wave. Look here,
Alexander Watson, it seems to me that we’ve been
tackling this little affair from the wrong end.”</p>

<p>“How’s that?”</p>

<p>“Why, we’ve been concentrating all our energies
on working backwards from suspicious
circumstances and people. What we ought to have done
is to start farther back and work forwards.”</p>

<p>“Don’t quite get you.”</p>

<p>“Well, put it another way. The big clue to any
murder must after all be supplied by the victim
himself. People don’t get murdered for
nothing—except by a chance burglar, of course, or a
homicidal maniac; and I think we can dismiss both of
those possibilities here. What I mean is, find out
all you can about the victim and the information
ought to give you a lead towards his murderer.
You see? We’ve been neglecting that side of it
altogether. What we ought to have been doing is to
collect every possible scrap of information we can
about old Stanworth. Find out exactly what sort
of a character he had and all his activities, and
then work forwards from that. Get me?”</p>

<p>“That seems reasonable enough,” Alec said
cautiously. “But how could we find out anything?
It’s no good asking Jefferson or Lady Stanworth.
We should never get any information out of them.”</p>

<p>“No, but we’ve got the very chance lying close
to our hand to find out pretty nearly as much as
Jefferson knows,” Roger said excitedly. “Didn’t
he say that he was going through all Stanworth’s
papers and accounts and things in the morning
room? What’s to prevent us having a look at
them, too?”</p>

<p>“You mean, nip in when nobody’s about and go
through them?”</p>

<p>“Exactly. Are you game?”</p>

<p>Alec was silent for a moment.</p>

<p>“Hardly done, is it?” he said at last. “Fellow’s
private papers and all that, I mean, what?”</p>

<p>“Alec, you sponge-headed parrot!” Roger
exclaimed, in tones of the liveliest exasperation.
“Really, you are a most maddening person!
Here’s a chap murdered under your very nose, and
you’re prepared to let the murderer walk away
scot-free because you think it isn’t ‘done’ to look
through the wretched victim’s private papers.
How remarkably pleased Stanworth would be to
hear you, wouldn’t he?”</p>

<p>“Of course if you put it like that,” Alec said
doubtfully.</p>

<p>“But I do put it like that, you goop! It’s the
only way there is of putting it. Come, Alec, do
try and be sensible for once in your life.”</p>

<p>“All right then,” Alec said, though not with
any vast degree of enthusiasm. “I’m game.”</p>

<p>“That’s more like it. Now look here, my bedroom
window is in the front of the house and I can see
the morning-room window from it. You go to
bed in the ordinary way, and sleep, too, if you like
(all the better, in case Jefferson should take it into
his head to have a look in at you); and I’ll sit up
and watch for the morning-room light to go out.
I’m safe enough in any case, as I can always
pretend to be working; I’ll put my things out, in fact.
Then I’ll wait for an hour after it’s out, to give
Jefferson plenty of time to get to sleep; and then
I’ll come along and rouse you, and we’ll creep down
at our leisure. How about that?”</p>

<p>“Sounds all right,” Alec admitted.</p>

<p>“Then that’s settled,” Roger said briskly.
“Well, I think the best thing for you to do is to go
to bed at once, yawning loudly and ostentatiously.
It will show that you have gone, for one thing; and
also it will show that we’re not pow-wowing
together out here. We’ve got to remember that those
three, in spite of their fair words and friendliness,
are bound to be regarding us with the greatest
suspicion. They don’t know how much we know,
and of course they daren’t give themselves away
by trying to find out. But you can be sure that
Jefferson has warned the others about that
footprint; and I expect that as soon as our backs were
turned just now, Mrs. Plant ran into the morning
room and recounted our conversation to them.
That’s why I pretended to be taken in by her
explanation.”</p>

<p>The bowl of Alec’s pipe glowed red in the
darkness.</p>

<p>“You’re still convinced, then, in spite of what
she said, that those three are in league together?”
he asked after a moment’s pause.</p>

<p>“Run along to bed, little Alexander,” said
Roger kindly, “and don’t be childish.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch21">

<h2>CHAPTER XXI. <br/> Mr. Sheringham is Dramatic</h2>

<p>Long after Alec’s not altogether willing departure,
Roger sat smoking and thinking. On the whole, he
was not sorry to be alone. Alec was proving a
somewhat discouraging companion in this business.
Evidently his heart was not in it; and for one so
situated the ferreting out of facts and the general
atmosphere of suspicion and distrust that is
inevitably attendant on such a task, must be
singularly distasteful. Roger could not blame Alec
for his undisguised reluctance to see the thing
through, but he also could not help thinking
somewhat wistfully of the enthusiastic and worshipping
prototypes whose mantle Alec was at first supposed
to have inherited. Roger felt that he could have
welcomed a little enthusiasm and worshipping at
the end of this eventful and very strenuous day.</p>

<p>He began to try to arrange methodically in his
mind the data they had collected. First with
regard to the murderer. He had made an effective
escape from the house only, in all probability as
it seemed, to enter it again by another way. Why?
Either because he lived there, or because he wished
to communicate with somebody who did. Which of
these? Heaven only knew!</p>

<p>He tried another line of attack. Which of the
minor puzzles still remained unsolved? Chiefly,
without doubt, the sudden change of attitude on
the part of Mrs. Plant and Jefferson before lunch.
But why need they have been apprehensive at all,
if the murderer had been able to communicate with
them after the crime had been committed?
Perhaps the interview had been a hurried one, and he
had forgotten to reassure them on some
particularly vital point. Yet he had been able to do so
in the course of the next morning. This meant that,
up till lunch time at any rate, he had still been in
the neighbourhood. More than that, actually on
the premises, as it seemed. Did this point more
definitely to the probability of his being one of the
household? It seemed feasible; but who? Jefferson?
Possibly, though there were several difficult points
to get over if this were the case. The women were
obviously out of the question. The butler? Again
possibly; but why on earth should the man want
to murder his master?</p>

<p>Yet the butler was a strange figure, there was no
getting away from that. And as far as Roger could
judge, there had been no love lost between him
and Stanworth. Yes, there was undoubtedly a
mystery of some kind connected with that butler.
Jefferson’s explanation of why Mr. Stanworth
should have employed a prize-fighting butler did
not strike one as quite satisfactory.</p>

<p>Then why had Mrs. Plant been crying in the
library? Roger strove to remember some scenes
in which she and Stanworth had been thrown into
contact. How had they behaved towards each
other? Had they seemed friendly, or the reverse?
As far as he could recollect, Stanworth had treated
her with the same casual good-fellowship which he
showed to everybody; while she—— Yes, now he
came to think of it, she had never appeared to be
on particularly good terms with him. She had been
quiet and reserved when he was in the room. Not
that she was really ever anything else but quiet
and reserved under any circumstances; but yes,
there had been a subtle change in her manner when
he was about. Obviously she had disliked him.</p>

<p>Clearly there was only one hope for finding the
answer to these riddles, and that was to investigate
Stanworth’s affairs. In all probability even that
would prove futile; but as far as Roger could see
there was no other way to try with even a moderate
chance of success. And while he was racking his
brains out here, Jefferson was sitting in the
morning room surrounded by documents which Roger
would give anything to see.</p>

<p>A sudden idea occurred to him. Why not beard
the lion in his den and offer to give Jefferson a
hand with his task? In any case, that would form a
direct challenge, the answer to which could not
fail to be interesting.</p>

<p>With Roger to think was, in nine cases out of ten,
to leap into precipitate action. Almost before the
thought had completed its passage through his
mind, he was on his feet and striding eagerly
towards the house.</p>

<p>Without troubling to knock he burst open the
door of the morning room and walked in. Jefferson
was seated in front of the table in the centre of the
room, surrounded, as Roger’s mind’s eye had seen
him, with papers and documents. Lady Stanworth
was not present.</p>

<p>He glanced up as Roger entered.</p>

<p>“Hullo, Sheringham,” he said in some surprise.
“Anything I can do for you?”</p>

<p>“Well, I was smoking out there in the garden
with nothing to do,” Roger remarked with a
friendly smile, “when it occurred to me that
instead of wasting my time like that I might be
giving you a hand here; you said you were up to
the eyes in it. Is there anything I can do to help?”</p>

<p>“Damned good of you,” Jefferson replied, a little
awkwardly, “but I don’t really think there’s
anything. I’m trying to tabulate a statement of his
financial position. Something like that is sure to
be wanted when the will’s proved, or whatever the
rigmarole is.”</p>

<p>“Well, surely there’s something I can do to help
you out, isn’t there?” Roger asked, sitting on a
corner of the table. “Add up tremendous columns
of figures, or something like that?”</p>

<p>Jefferson hesitated and glanced round at the
papers in front of him. “Well,” he said slowly.</p>

<p>“Of course if there’s anything particularly
private in Stanworth’s affairs——!” Roger remarked
airily.</p>

<p>Jefferson looked up quickly. “Private? There’s
nothing particularly private about them. Why
should there be?”</p>

<p>“Then make use of me by all means, my dear
chap. I’m at a loose end, and only too glad to give
you a hand.”</p>

<p>“Of course if you put it like that, I should be
only too pleased,” Jefferson replied, though not
without a certain reluctance. “H’m! I was just
wondering what would be the best job for you to
tackle.”</p>

<p>“Oh, anything that comes along, you know.”</p>

<p>“Well, look here, I tell you what you might
do,” Jefferson said suddenly. “I want a statement
made out showing his holdings in the various
companies of which he was a director, with the
approximate value of the shares, their yield for
the last financial year, his director’s fees, and all
the rest of it. Manage that, could you?”</p>

<p>“Like a shot,” said Roger with great
cheerfulness, concealing his disappointment at the
comparative unimportance of the task allotted to
him. Such details as these could be obtained from
any work of reference on the subject; he had
hoped for a little insight into something that was
rather less public property.</p>

<p>Still, half a bun was better than no cake, and he
settled down at the opposite side of the table and
set to work willingly enough on the data with
which Jefferson supplied him. From time to time
he tried to peep surreptitiously at some of the
documents in which the latter was immersed, but
Jefferson was guarding them too jealously and
Roger could obtain no clear idea of their contents.</p>

<p>An hour later he sat back in his chair with a sigh
of relief.</p>

<p>“There you are! And a very charming and
comprehensive statement, too.”</p>

<p>“Thanks very much,” Jefferson said, taking the
statement which Roger was holding out to him.
“Damned good of you, Sheringham. Saved me a
lot of trouble. And you’ve done it in about a
quarter of the time I should have taken. Not my
sort of line, this game.”</p>

<p>“So I should imagine,” Roger observed with
studied carelessness. “In fact, it’s always
surprised me that you should have taken a job like
this secretaryship on at all. I should have put you
down as a typical open-air man, if you’ll allow me
to say so. The type of Englishman that won our
colonies for us, you know.”</p>

<p>“No option,” Jefferson said, with a return to
his usual curt manner. “Not my choice, I assure
you. Had to take what I could jolly well get.”</p>

<p>“Rotten, I know,” Roger replied sympathetically,
watching the other curiously. In spite of
himself and what he felt he knew he could not help
a mild liking for this abrupt, taciturn person; a
typical soldier of the wordless, unsocial school.
It struck Roger at that moment that Jefferson,
whom he had been inclined to regard at first as
something of a sinister figure, was in reality
nothing of the sort. The man was shy, exceedingly
shy, and he endeavoured to hide this shyness
behind a brusque, almost rude manner; and as
always in such a case, this had produced an entirely
mistaken first impression of the man himself
behind the manner. Jefferson was downright; but it
was the downrightness of honesty, Roger felt, not
of villainy.</p>

<p>Roger began, half unconsciously, to rearrange
some of his ideas. If Jefferson was concerned in
Stanworth’s death, then it would be because there
was a very excellent reason for that death. All
the more reason to probe into Stanworth’s affairs.</p>

<p>“Going to stay down here long, Jefferson?” he
asked, with an obvious yawn.</p>

<p>“Not very. Just got to finish off this job I’m
on now. You turn in. Must be getting pretty late.”</p>

<p>Roger glanced at his watch. “Close on twelve.
Right, I think I will, if you’re sure there’s nothing
else I can do?”</p>

<p>“Nothing, thanks. I shall have a go at it
before breakfast myself. Got to get cleared up in
here by eleven. Well, good-night, Sheringham, and
many thanks.”</p>

<p>Roger sought his room in a state of some
perplexity. This new conclusion of his with regard to
Jefferson was going to make things very much
more complicated instead of more simple. He felt
a strong sympathy with Jefferson all of a sudden.
He was not a clever man; certainly he was not the
brains of the conspiracy. What must his feelings
be when he knew, as indeed he must know, that
Roger was tracking out things that would, in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred and with only
very ordinary luck, have remained undiscovered
for ever? How must he regard the net which he
could see spread to catch him, and with
him—whom?</p>

<p>Roger dragged a chair up to the open window,
and sat down with his feet on the sill. He felt he
was getting maudlin. This had every appearance
of a thoroughly cold-blooded crime, and here he
was feeling sorry already for one of its chief
participants. Yet it was because Jefferson, as he saw
now that the scales had suddenly fallen from his
eyes, was such a fine type of man—the tall, thin,
small-headed type that is the real pioneer of our
race—and because he himself genuinely liked all
three members of that suspicious trio, that Roger,
without necessarily giving way to maudlin sentiment,
was yet unable to stifle his very real regret
that everything should point so decisively to their
guilt.</p>

<p>Still, it was too late to back out now. He owed
it to himself, if not even to them, to see the thing
through. Roger could sympathise more fully now
with Alec’s feelings on the matter. Curious that he
should after all have come round in the end to that
much-derided point of view of Alec’s!</p>

<p>He began to review the personal element in the
light of this new revelation. How did it help?
If Jefferson was an honest man and would only kill
because nothing short of killing would meet some
unknown case, then what was most likely to have
produced such a state of affairs? What is the
mainspring that actuates three quarters of such
drastic deeds? Well, the answer to that was
obvious enough. A woman.</p>

<p>How did that apply in this case? Could Jefferson
be in love with some woman, whose happiness or
peace had been threatened in some mysterious way
by Stanworth himself, and if so, who was the
woman? Lady Stanworth? Mrs. Plant? Roger
uttered an involuntary exclamation. Mrs. Plant!</p>

<p>That, at any rate, would fit in with some of the
puzzling facts. The powder on the arm of the
couch, for instance, and the wet handkerchief.</p>

<p>Roger’s imagination began to ride free. Mrs.
Plant was in the library with Stanworth; he was
bullying her, or something. Perhaps he was trying
to force some course of action upon her which
was repugnant to her. In any case, she weeps and
implores him. He is adamant. She hides her face
against the arm of the couch and goes on weeping.
Jefferson enters, sees at a glance what is happening
and kills Stanworth in the madness of his passion
with as little compunction as one would feel
towards a rat. Mrs. Plant looks on in horror; tries
to interfere, perhaps, but without effect. As soon
as the thing is done she becomes as cool as ice
and sets the stage for suicide.</p>

<p>Roger jumped to his feet and leaned out over the
sill.</p>

<p>“It fits!” he murmured excitedly. “It all fits in!”</p>

<p>Glancing downwards, he noticed that the
morning-room light had been extinguished and made a
note of the time. It was past one. He sank back in
his chair and began to consider whether the other
pieces of the puzzle would slip as neatly into this
general scene—the safe incident, the change of
attitude, Lady Stanworth, and so on. No, this
was not going to be quite so easy.</p>

<p>At the end of the hour he was still uncertain.
The main outline still seemed convincing enough,
but all the details appeared hardly so glib.</p>

<p>“I’m getting addled,” he murmured aloud, as
he rose from the chair. “Better give this side of it
a rest for a little.”</p>

<p>He made his way softly out of the room and
crept along the passage to Alec’s bedroom.</p>

<p>Alec sat abruptly up in bed as the door opened.</p>

<p>“That you, Roger?” he demanded.</p>

<p>“No, this is Jefferson,” Roger said, hastily
shutting the door behind him. “And very nicely
you’d have given things away if it had been,
Alexander Watson. And you might try and
moderate your voice a bit. The sound of a foghorn in the
middle of the night is bound to make people
wonder. Ready?”</p>

<p>Alec got out of bed and put on his
dressing-gown.</p>

<p>“Right-ho.”</p>

<p>As quietly as possible they stole downstairs
and into the morning room. Roger drew the thick
curtains together carefully before switching on the
light.</p>

<p>“Now for it!” he breathed excitedly, eyeing the
crowded table with eagerness. “That little pile
there I’ve already been through, so you needn’t
bother about those.”</p>

<p>“Already?” Alec asked in surprise.</p>

<p>“Yes, in company with my excellent friend,
Major Jefferson,” Roger grinned, and proceeded
to explain what he had been doing.</p>

<p>“You’ve got some cheek,” Alec commented
with a smile.</p>

<p>“Yes, and I’ve got something more than that,”
Roger retorted. “I’ve got a thoroughly sound
working idea as to who killed Stanworth and under
what circumstances. I can tell you, friend Alec,
I’ve been uncommonly busy these last two hours or
so.”</p>

<p>“You have?” said Alec eagerly. “Tell me.”</p>

<p>Roger shook his head. “Not at the moment,” he
said, sitting down in Jefferson’s chair. “Let’s
get this little job safely done first. Now look
here, you go through these miscellaneous
documents, will you? I want to study the passbooks
first of all. And I’ll tell you one thing I’ve
discovered. The income from those various businesses
of his didn’t amount to a quarter of what he must
have been spending. He cleared just over two
thousand out of all five of them last year, and I
should say that he’s been living at the rate of at
least ten thousand a year. And besides all that,
he’s been investing heavily as well. Where does
all the extra cash come from? That’s what I want
to find out.”</p>

<p>Alec began to wade obediently through the sheaf
of papers that Roger had indicated, while the latter
picked out the passbooks and glanced at them.</p>

<p>“Hullo!” he exclaimed suddenly. “Two of these
accounts are in his own name, and the other
three appear to be in three different names.
Jefferson never said anything about that. Now I
wonder what the devil that means?”</p>

<p>He began to pore over them methodically, and
for some time there was silence in the room. Then
Roger looked up with a frown.</p>

<p>“I don’t understand these at all,” he said
slowly. “The dividends are all shown in his own
two passbooks, and various checks and so on; but
the other three seem to be made up entirely of
cash payments, on the credit side at any rate.
Listen to this: Feb. 9th, £100; Feb. 17th, £500;
Mar. 12th, £200; Mar. 28th, £350; and then April
9th, £1,000. What on earth do you make of that?
All in cash, and such nice round sums. Why a
thousand pounds in cash?”</p>

<p>“Seems funny, certainly,” Alec agreed.</p>

<p>Roger picked up another of the books, and
flicked the pages through carefully.</p>

<p>“This is just the same sort of thing. Hullo,
here’s an entry of £5,000 paid in cash. £5,000 in
cash! Now why? What does it mean? Does your
pile throw any light on it?”</p>

<p>“No, these are only business letters. There
doesn’t appear to be anything out of the ordinary
here at all.”</p>

<p>Roger still held the book mechanically in his
hand, but he was staring blankly at the wall.</p>

<p>“Nothing but cash,” he murmured softly; “all
sorts of sums between £10 and £5,000; each sum
a multiple of ten, or some other round figure; no
shillings or pence; and <em>cash!</em> That’s what worries
me. Why cash? I can’t find a single check marked
on the credit side of these three books. And where
in the name of goodness did all this cash come
from? There’s absolutely nothing to account
for it, as far as I can make out. It’s not the
proceeds of any sort of business, apparently. Besides,
the debit side shows nothing but checks drawn to
self. He paid it in as cash and he drew it out
himself. Now what on earth does all this mean?”</p>

<p>“Don’t ask me,” said Alec helplessly.</p>

<p>Roger stared at the wall in silence for a few
minutes. Suddenly, his mouth opened, and he
whistled softly.</p>

<p>“By—Jove!” he exclaimed, transferring his
gaze to Alec. “I believe I’ve got it. And doesn’t
it simplify things, too? Yes, it <em>must</em> be right. It
makes everything as clear as daylight. Good
lord! Well, I’m damned!”</p>

<p>“Out with it, then!”</p>

<p>Roger paused impressively. This was the most
dramatic moment he had yet encountered, and he
was not going to spoil it by any undue
precipitation.</p>

<p>He smote the table softly with his fist by way of
preparation. Then:</p>

<p>“Old Stanworth was a professional
blackmailer!” he said in vibrant tones.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch22">

<h2>CHAPTER XXII. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Solves the Mystery</h2>

<p>It was past ten o’clock on the following morning,
and Roger and Alec were engaged in taking a
constitutional in the rose garden after breakfast
before the inquest proceedings opened. Roger
had refused to say anything further on the previous
evening—or, rather, in the small hours of the same
morning. All he had done was to remark that it
was quite time they were in bed, and that he
wanted a clear head before discussing the affair in
the light of this new revelation of Stanworth’s
character. He remarked this not once, but many
times; and Alec had perforce to be contented with
it.</p>

<p>Now, with pipes in full blast, they were
preparing to go further into the matter.</p>

<p>Roger himself was complacently triumphant.</p>

<p>“Mystery?” he repeated, in answer to a question
of Alec’s. “There isn’t any mystery now. I’ve
solved it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I know the mystery about Stanworth is
cleared up,” said Alec impatiently; to tell the
truth, Roger in this mood irritated him not a little.
“That is, if your explanation is the right one, which
I’m not disputing at the moment.”</p>

<p>“Thank you very much.”</p>

<p>“But what about the mystery of his death? You
can’t have solved that.”</p>

<p>“On the contrary, Alexander,” Roger rejoined,
with a satisfied smile; “that is exactly what I
have done.”</p>

<p>“Oh? Then who killed him?”</p>

<p>“If you want it in a single word,” Roger said,
not without a certain reluctance, “Jefferson.”</p>

<p>“<em>Jefferson?</em>” Alec exclaimed. “Oh, rot!”</p>

<p>Roger glanced at him curiously. “Now that’s
interesting,” he commented. “Why do you say
‘rot’ like that?”</p>

<p>“Because——” Alec hesitated. “Oh, I don’t
know. It seems such rot to think of Jefferson
committing a murder, I suppose. Why?”</p>

<p>“You mean, you don’t think it’s the sort of
thing he would do?”</p>

<p>“I certainly don’t!” Alec returned with
emphasis.</p>

<p>“Do you know, Alec, I’m beginning to think
you’re a better judge of character than I am. It’s
a humiliating confession, but there you are. Tell
me, have you always thought that about Jefferson,
or only just recently?”</p>

<p>Alec considered. “Ever since this business
cropped up, I think. It always seemed fantastic
to me that Jefferson could be mixed up with it.
And the two women as well, for that matter. No,
Roger, if you’re trying to fix it on Jefferson, I’m
quite sure you’re making a bad mistake.”</p>

<p>Roger’s complacency was unshaken.</p>

<p>“If the case were an ordinary one, no doubt,”
he replied. “But you’ve got to remember that this
isn’t. Stanworth was a blackmailer, and that
alters everything. You may murder an
ordinary man, but you execute a blackmailer. That is,
if you don’t kill him on the spur of the moment,
carried away by madness or exasperation. You’d
do that sort of thing on your own account, wouldn’t
you? Well, how much more so are you going to do
it on behalf of a woman, and that a woman with
whom you’re in love? I tell you, Alec, the whole
thing is as plain as a pikestaff.”</p>

<p>“Meaning that Jefferson is in love?”</p>

<p>“Precisely.”</p>

<p>“Who with?”</p>

<p>“Mrs. Plant.”</p>

<p>Alec gasped. “Good Lord, how on earth do you
know that?” he asked incredulously.</p>

<p>“I don’t,” Roger replied with a pleased air.
“But he must be. It’s the only explanation. I
deduced it.”</p>

<p>“The devil you did!”</p>

<p>“Yes, I’d arrived at that conclusion even before
we discovered the secret of Stanworth’s hidden
life. That clears up absolutely everything.”</p>

<p>“Does it? I admit it seems to make some of the
things more understandable, but I’m dashed if I
can see how it makes you so sure that Jefferson
killed him.”</p>

<p>“I’ll explain,” Roger said kindly. “Jefferson
was secretly in love with Mrs. Plant. For some
reason or other Mrs. Plant was being blackmailed
by Stanworth unknown to Jefferson. He has a
midnight interview with her in the library and
demands money. She weeps and implores him
(hence the dampness of the handkerchief) and lays
a face on the arm of the couch as women do (hence
the powder in that particular place). Stanworth is
adamant; he must have money. She says she hasn’t
got any money. All right, says Stanworth, hand
your jewels over then. She goes and gets her
jewels and gives them to him. Stanworth opens
the safe and tells her that is where he keeps his
evidence against her. Then he locks the jewels up
and tells her she can go. Enter Jefferson
unexpectedly, takes in the situation at a glance, and
goes for Stanworth bald-headed. Stanworth fires
at him and misses, hitting the vase. Jefferson
grabs his wrist, forces the revolver round and
pulls the trigger, thus shooting Stanworth with
his own revolver without relaxing the other’s grip
on it. Mrs. Plant is horror-struck; but, seeing that
the thing is done, she takes command of the
situation and arranges the rest. And that,” Roger
concluded, with a metaphorical pat on his own
back, “is the solution of the peculiar events at
Layton Court.”</p>

<p>“Is it?” Alec said, with less certainty. “It’s
a very pretty little story, no doubt, and does great
credit to your imagination. But as to being the
solution—well, I’m not so sure about that.”</p>

<p>“It seems to me to account for pretty well
everything,” Roger retorted. “But you always
were difficult to please, Alec. Think. The broken
vase and the second bullet; how the murder was
committed; the fact that the murderer went back
into the house again; the agitation about the safe
being opened; Mrs. Plant’s behaviour in the
morning, her reluctance to give evidence (in case she
let out anything of what really happened, you see),
and her fright when I sprang on her the fact that
I knew she’d been in the library, after all; the
disappearance of the footprints; the presence of the
powder and the dampness of the handkerchief;
Lady Stanworth’s indifference to her brother-in-law’s
death (I expect he had some hold over her,
too, if the truth were known); the employment of a
prize-fighter as a butler, obviously a measure of
self-protection; the fact that I heard people
moving about late that night; everything! All cleared
up and explained.”</p>

<p>“Humph!” said Alec noncommittally.</p>

<p>“Well, can you find a single flaw in it?” Roger
asked, in some exasperation.</p>

<p>“If it comes to that,” Alec replied slowly, “why
was it that both Mrs. Plant and Jefferson suddenly
had no objection to the safe being opened, after
they’d both shown that they were anxious to
prevent it?”</p>

<p>“Easy!” Roger retorted. “While we were
upstairs, Jefferson opened the safe and took out the
documents. It would only take a minute, after all.
Any objection to that?”</p>

<p>“Did the inspector leave the keys behind? I
thought he put them in his pocket.”</p>

<p>“No, he left them on the table, and Jefferson
put them in <em>his</em> pocket. I remember noticing that
at the time, and wondering why he did it. Now
it’s obvious, of course.”</p>

<p>“Well, what about that little pile of ashes in the
library hearth? You suggested that it might be
the remains of some important documents, and
you thought that Jefferson looked uncommonly
relieved at the idea.”</p>

<p>“My mistake at the time,” Roger said promptly.
“As for the ashes, they might have been
anything. I don’t attach any importance to them.”</p>

<p>“But you did!” Alec persisted obstinately.</p>

<p>“Yes, excellent but sponge-headed Alexander,”
Roger explained patiently, “because I thought at
first that they <em>were</em> important. Now I see that I
was mistaken, and they <em>aren’t</em>. Are you beginning
to grasp the idea?”</p>

<p>“Well, tell me this, then,” Alec said suddenly.
“Why the dickens didn’t Jefferson get the
documents out of the safe directly after Stanworth’s
death, instead of waiting till the next morning
and getting so agitated about it?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I thought of that. Presumably because
they were both so flustered at what had happened
that they forgot all about the documents in their
anxiety to cover up their traces and get away.”</p>

<p>Alec sniffed slightly. “Rather unlikely that, isn’t
it? Not natural, as you’re always so fond of
saying.”</p>

<p>“Unlikely things do happen sometimes,
however. This one did, for instance.”</p>

<p>“Then you’re absolutely convinced that
Jefferson killed Stanworth, and that’s how it all
happened, are you?”</p>

<p>“I am, Alexander.”</p>

<p>“Oh!”</p>

<p>“Well, aren’t you?”</p>

<p>“No,” Alec said uncompromisingly. “I’m not.”</p>

<p>“But dash it all, I’ve proved it to you. You
can’t shove all my proofs on one side in that
off-hand way. The whole thing stands to reason. You
can’t get away from it.”</p>

<p>“If you say that Jefferson killed Stanworth,”
Alec proceeded with obstinate deliberation, “then
I’m perfectly sure you’re wrong. That’s all.”</p>

<p>“But <em>why</em>?”</p>

<p>“Because I don’t believe he did,” said Alec, with
an air of great wisdom. “He’s not the sort of
fellow to do a thing like that. I suppose I’ve got a
sort of intuition about it,” he added modestly.</p>

<p>“Intuition be hanged!” Roger retorted, with a
not unjustified irritation. “You can’t back your
blessed intuition against proofs like the ones I’ve
just given you.”</p>

<p>“But I do,” Alec said simply. “Every time,”
he added, with a careful attention to detail.</p>

<p>“Then I wash my hands of you,” said Roger
shortly.</p>

<p>For a time they paced side by side in silence.
Alec appeared to be pondering deeply, and Roger
was undisguisedly huffy. After all, it is a little
irksome to solve in so ingenious yet so convincing
a way a problem of such apparently mysterious
depth, only to be brought up against a blank wall
of disbelief founded on so unstable a foundation as
mere intuition. One’s sympathy is certainly with
Roger at that moment.</p>

<p>“Well, anyhow, what are you going to do about
it?” Alec asked, after some minutes’ reflection.
“Surely you’re not going to tell the police without
troubling to verify anything further, are you?”</p>

<p>“Of course not. In fact, I haven’t made up
my mind whether I shall tell the police at all yet.”</p>

<p>“Oh!”</p>

<p>“It depends largely on what the two of
them—Jefferson and Mrs. Plant—have to tell me.”</p>

<p>“So you’re going to tackle them about it, are
you?”</p>

<p>“Of course.”</p>

<p>There was another short silence.</p>

<p>“Are you going to see them together?” Alec
asked.</p>

<p>“No, I shall speak to Mrs. Plant first, I think.
There are one or two minor points I want to clear
up before I see Jefferson.”</p>

<p>Alec reflected again. “I shouldn’t, Roger, if
I were you,” he said quite earnestly.</p>

<p>“Wouldn’t what?”</p>

<p>“Speak to either of them about it. You’re not
at all sure whether you’re really right or not; after
all, it’s only guesswork from beginning to end,
however brilliant guesswork.”</p>

<p>“Guesswork!” Roger repeated indignantly.
“There isn’t any guesswork about it! It’s——”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know; you’re going to say it’s deduction.
Well, you may be right or you may not; the thing’s
too deep for me. But shall I tell you what I think
about it? I think you’d be wise to drop the whole
thing just as it is. You think you’ve solved it;
and perhaps you have. Why not be content with
that?”</p>

<p>“But why this change of mind, Alexander?”</p>

<p>“It isn’t a change of mind. You know I’ve never
been keen on it from the very beginning. But now
that Stanworth’s turned out to be such a skunk,
why——”</p>

<p>“Yes, I see what you mean,” Roger said softly.
“You mean that if Jefferson did kill Stanworth,
he was perfectly right to do so and we ought to let
him get away with it, don’t you?”</p>

<p>“Well,” Alec said awkwardly, “I wouldn’t go
so far as to say that, but——”</p>

<p>“But I don’t know that <em>I</em> wouldn’t,” Roger
interrupted. “That’s why I said just now that I
hadn’t decided whether I’d tell the police or not.
It all depends on whether things did happen as I
imagine, or not. But the thing is, I must find out.”</p>

<p>“But must you?” Alec said slowly. “As things
are at present, whatever you may think, you don’t
actually <em>know</em>. And if you do find out for certain,
it seems to me that you’ll be deliberately saddling
yourself with a responsibility which you might
wish then that you hadn’t been so jolly eager to
adopt.”</p>

<p>“If it comes to that, Alec,” Roger retorted, “I
should have said that to take no steps to find out
the truth now we’re so near it is deliberately to
shirk that very responsibility. Wouldn’t you?”</p>

<p>Alec was silent for a moment.</p>

<p>“Hang that!” he said with sudden energy.
“Leave things as they are, Roger. There are some
things of which it’s better that everyone should
remain in ignorance. Don’t go and find out a lot
of things that you’d give anything afterwards not
to have discovered.”</p>

<p>Roger laughed lightly. “Oh, I know it’s the right
thing to say, ‘Who am I to take the responsibility
of judging you? No, it is not for me to do so. I will
hand you over to the police, which means that
you will inevitably be hanged. It’s a pity, because
my personal opinion is that your case is not
murder, but justifiable homicide; and I know that a
jury, directed by a judge with his eye on the asinine
side of the law, would never be allowed to take that
view. That’s why I so much regret having myself to
place a halter round your neck by handing you over
to the police. But how is such a one as me to judge
you?’ That’s what they always say in storybooks,
isn’t it? But don’t you worry, Alec. I’m not a
spineless nincompoop like that, and I’m not in the least
afraid of taking the responsibility of judging a
case on its own merits; in fact, I consider that I’m
very much more competent to do so than are
twelve thick-headed rustics, presided over by a
somnolent and tortuous-minded gentleman in an
out-of-date wig. No, I’m going to follow this up to
the bitter end, and when I’ve got there I’ll take
counsel with you as to what we’re going to do about
it.”</p>

<p>“I wish to goodness you’d leave it alone, Roger,”
said Alec, almost plaintively.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch23">

<h2>CHAPTER XXIII. <br/> Mrs. Plant Talks</h2>

<p>The inquest, in spite of the snail-like deliberation
demanded by all legal processes, did not occupy
more than an hour and a half. The issue was never
in the least doubt, and the proceedings were more
or less perfunctory. Fortunately the coroner was
not of a particularly inquisitive disposition and
was quite satisfied with the facts as they stood; he
did not waste very much time, beyond what was
absolutely necessary, in probing into such matters
as motive. Only the minimum possible number of
witnesses were called, and though Roger listened
carefully, no new facts of any description came to
light.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant gave her evidence clearly and
without a tremor; Lady Stanworth’s statuesque calm
was as unshaken as ever. Jefferson was in the
witness box longer than anyone else, and told his story
in his usual abrupt, straightforward manner.</p>

<p>“You’d never think, to see and hear him, that
his whole evidence is nothing but a pack of lies,
would you?” Roger whispered to Alec.</p>

<p>“No, I wouldn’t; and what’s more I don’t,”
retorted that gentleman behind his hand. “It’s
my belief that he thinks he’s telling the truth.”</p>

<p>Roger groaned gently.</p>

<p>As far as minor witnesses went, Graves, the
butler, and Roger were both called to corroborate
Jefferson’s tale of the breaking down of the door;
and the former was questioned regarding his
discovery of the confession, while Roger told of the
locked windows. Alec was not even called at all.</p>

<p>The verdict, “Suicide during temporary
insanity,” was inevitable.</p>

<p>As they left the morning room Roger caught
Alec’s arm.</p>

<p>“I’m going to try and get hold of Mrs. Plant
now, before lunch,” he said in a low voice. “Do
you want to be present, or not?”</p>

<p>Alec hesitated. “What exactly are you going to
do?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Tax her with having been blackmailed by
Stanworth, and invite her to tell me the truth
about the night before last.”</p>

<p>“Then I don’t want to be there,” Alec said with
decision. “The whole thing absolutely sickens
me.”</p>

<p>Roger nodded approvingly. “I think it’s better
that you shouldn’t be, I’m bound to say. And I
can tell you afterwards what happened.”</p>

<p>“When shall I see you, then?”</p>

<p>“After lunch. I’ll have a word with you before
I tackle Jefferson.”</p>

<p>He edged away from Alec and intercepted Mrs.
Plant, who was on the point of ascending the
staircase. Jefferson and Lady Stanworth were still
talking with the coroner in the morning room.</p>

<p>“Mrs. Plant,” he said quietly, “can you spare
me a few minutes? I want to have a little chat
with you.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant glanced at him sharply.</p>

<p>“But I’m just going up to finish my packing,”
she objected.</p>

<p>“What I have to say is very much more
important than packing,” Roger returned weightily,
unconsciously regarding her from beneath lowered
brows.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant laughed nervously. “Dear me, Mr
Sheringham, you sound very impressive. What is
it that you want to speak to me about?”</p>

<p>“If you will come out into the garden where we
shall not be overheard, I will tell you.”</p>

<p>For a moment she hesitated, with a longing
glance up the staircase as if she wished to escape
from something peculiarly unwelcome. Then with
a little shrug of her shoulders she turned into the
hall.</p>

<p>“Oh, very well,” she said, with an assumption
of lightness. “If you really make such a point of
it.”</p>

<p>Roger piloted her out through the front door,
picking up a couple of folding garden chairs as he
passed through the hall. He led the way into a
deserted corner of the rose garden that could not
be overlooked from the house, and set up his chairs
so that they faced one another.</p>

<p>“Will you sit down, Mrs. Plant?” he said
gravely.</p>

<p>If he had been trying to work up an
atmosphere with a view to facilitating further
developments, Roger appeared to have succeeded. Mrs.
Plant seated herself without a word and looked at
him apprehensively.</p>

<p>Roger sat down with deliberation and gazed at
her for a moment in silence. Then:</p>

<p>“It has come to my knowledge that you were not
speaking the truth to me yesterday about your
visit to the library, Mrs. Plant,” he said slowly.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant started. “Really, Mr. Sheringham!”
she exclaimed, flushing with indignation and rising
hurriedly to her feet. “I fail to understand what
right you have to insult me in this gross way. This
is the second time you have attempted to question
me, and you will allow me to say that I consider
your conduct presumptuous and impertinent in
the highest degree. I should be obliged if you
would kindly refrain from making me the target
for your abominable lack of manners in future.”</p>

<p>Roger gazed up at her unperturbed.</p>

<p>“You were really there,” he continued
impressively, “for the purpose of being blackmailed by
Mr. Stanworth.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant sat down so suddenly that it seemed
as if her knees had collapsed beneath her. Her
hands gripped the sides of her chair till the
knuckles were as white as her face.</p>

<p>“Now look here, Mrs. Plant,” Roger said,
leaning forward and speaking rapidly, “there’s been
something very funny going on here, and I mean to
get to the bottom of it. Believe me, I don’t mean
you any harm. I’m absolutely on your side, if
things are as I believe them to be. But I must
know the truth. As a matter of fact, I think I know
pretty well everything already; but I want you to
confirm it for me with your own lips. I want you
to tell me the plain, unvarnished truth of what
happened in Stanworth’s library the night before
last.”</p>

<p>“And if I refuse?” almost whispered Mrs.
Plant, through bloodless lips.</p>

<p>Roger shrugged his shoulders. “You leave me
with absolutely no alternative. I shall have to tell
the police what I know and leave the rest in their
hands.”</p>

<p>“The <em>police</em>?”</p>

<p>“Yes. And I assure you I am not bluffing. As
I said, I think I know almost everything already.
I know, for instance, that you sat on the couch
and begged Mr. Stanworth to let you off; that you
cried, in fact, when he refused to do so. Then you
said you hadn’t any money, didn’t you? And he
offered to take your jewels instead. Then—— Oh,
but you see. I’m not pretending to know what
I don’t.”</p>

<p>Roger’s bow, drawn thus at a venture, had
found its target. Mrs. Plant acknowledged the
truth of his deductions by crying incredulously,
“But how do you know all this, Mr. Sheringham?
How can you possibly have found it out?”</p>

<p>“We won’t go into that at the moment, if you
don’t mind,” Roger replied complacently. “Let
it suffice that I do know. Now I want you to tell
me in your own words the whole truth about that
night. Please leave out nothing at all; you must
understand that I can check you if you do so, and
if you deceive me again——!” He paused
eloquently.</p>

<p>For a few moments Mrs. Plant sat motionless,
gazing into her lap. Then she raised her head and
wiped her eyes.</p>

<p>“Very well,” she said in a low voice. “I will
tell you. You understand that I am placing not
only my happiness, but literally my whole future
in your hands by doing so?”</p>

<p>“I do, Mrs. Plant,” Roger said earnestly.
“And I assure you I will not abuse your
confidence, although I am forcing it in this way.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant’s eyes rested on a bed of roses close
at hand. “You know that Mr. Stanworth was a
blackmailer?” she said.</p>

<p>Roger nodded. “On a very large scale, indeed.”</p>

<p>“Is that so? I did not know it; but it does not
surprise me in the least.” Her voice sank. “He
found out somehow that before I was married
I—I——”</p>

<p>“There’s not the least need to go into that sort
of detail, Mrs. Plant,” Roger interposed quickly.
“All that concerns me is that he <em>was</em> blackmailing
you; I don’t want to know why.”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant flashed a grateful look at him.</p>

<p>“Thank you,” she said softly. “Well, I will
just say that it was in connection with an incident
which happened before I was married. I have never
told my husband about it (it was all past and
done with before I ever met him), because I knew
that it would break his heart. And we are devotedly
in love with each other,” she added simply.</p>

<p>“I understand,” Roger murmured
sympathetically.</p>

<p>“Then that devil found out about it! For he was
a devil, Mr. Sheringham,” Mrs. Plant said,
looking at Roger with wide eyes, in which traces of
horror still lingered. “I could never have imagined
that anyone could be so absolutely inhuman. Oh!
It was hell!” She shuddered involuntarily.</p>

<p>“He demanded money, of course,” she went on
after a minute in a calmer voice; “and I paid him
every penny I could. You must understand that
I was willing to face any sacrifice rather than that
my husband should be told. The other night I had
to tell him that I had no more money left. I lied
when I told you what time I went into the library.
He stopped me in the hall to tell me that he wanted
to see me there at half-past twelve. That would be
when everyone else was in bed, you see. Mr. Stanworth
always preserved the greatest secrecy about
these meetings.”</p>

<p>“And you went at half-past twelve?” Roger
prompted sympathetically.</p>

<p>“Yes, taking my jewels with me. I told him
that I had no more money. He wasn’t angry. He
never was. Just cold and sneering and horrible.
He said he’d take the jewels for that time, but I
must bring him the money he wanted—two
hundred and fifty pounds—in three months’ time.”</p>

<p>“But how could you, if you hadn’t got it?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant was silent. Then gazing unseeingly
at the rose bed, as if living over again that tragic
interview, she said in a curiously toneless voice,
“He said that a pretty woman like me could
always obtain money if it was necessary. He said he
would introduce me to a man out of whom I—I
could get it, if I played my cards properly. He
said if I wasn’t ready with the two hundred and
fifty pounds within three months he would tell my
husband everything.”</p>

<p>“My God!” said Roger softly, appalled.</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant looked him suddenly straight in the
face.</p>

<p>“That will show you what sort of a man Mr.
Stanworth was, if you didn’t know,” she said
quietly.</p>

<p>“I didn’t,” Roger answered. “This explains a
good deal,” he added to himself. “And then, I
suppose, Jefferson came in?”</p>

<p>“Major Jefferson?” Mrs. Plant repeated, in
unmistakable astonishment.</p>

<p>“Yes. Wasn’t that when he came in?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant stared at him in amazement.</p>

<p>“But Major Jefferson never came in at all!”
she exclaimed. “What ever makes you think
that?”</p>

<p>It was Roger’s turn to be astonished.</p>

<p>“Do I understand you to say that Jefferson
never came in at all while you were in the library
with Stanworth?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Good gracious, no,” Mrs. Plant replied
emphatically. “I should hope not! Why ever should
he?”</p>

<p>“I—I don’t really know,” Roger said lamely.
“I thought he did. I must have been mistaken.”
In spite of the unexpectedness of her denial, he was
convinced that Mrs. Plant was telling the truth;
her surprise was far too genuine to have been
assumed. “Well, what happened?”</p>

<p>“Nothing. I—I implored him not to be so
hard and to be content with what I had paid
him and give me back the evidence he’d got,
but——”</p>

<p>“Where did he keep the evidence, by the way?
In the safe?”</p>

<p>“Yes. He always carried the safe about with
him. It was supposed to be burglar-proof.”</p>

<p>“Was it open while you were there?”</p>

<p>“He opened it to put my jewels in before I
went.”</p>

<p>“And did he leave it open, or did he lock it up
again?”</p>

<p>“He locked it before I left the room.”</p>

<p>“I see. When would that be?”</p>

<p>“Oh, past one o’clock, I should say. I didn’t
notice the time very particularly. I was feeling too
upset.”</p>

<p>“Naturally. And nothing of any importance
occurred between his—his ultimatum and your
departure upstairs?”</p>

<p>“No. He refused to give way an inch, and at
last I left off trying to persuade him and went up
to bed. That is all.”</p>

<p>“And nobody else came in at all? Not a sign of
anybody else?”</p>

<p>“No; nobody.”</p>

<p>“Humph!” said Roger thoughtfully. This was
decidedly disappointing; yet somehow it was
impossible to disbelieve Mrs. Plant’s story. Still,
Jefferson might have come in later, having heard
something of what had taken place from outside
the room. At any rate, it appeared that Mrs.
Plant herself could have had no hand in the actual
murder, whatever provocation she might have
received.</p>

<p>He decided to sound her a little farther.</p>

<p>“In view of what you’ve told me, Mrs. Plant,”
he remarked rather more casually, “it seems very
extraordinary that Stanworth should have
committed suicide, doesn’t it? Can you account for it
in any way?”</p>

<p>“No, I certainly can’t. It’s inexplicable to me.
But, Mr. Sheringham, I am so thankful! No wonder
I fainted when you told us after breakfast. I
suddenly felt as if I had been let out of prison. Oh,
that dreadful, terrible feeling of being in that
man’s power! You can’t imagine it; or what an
overwhelming relief it was to hear of his death.”</p>

<p>“Indeed I can, Mrs. Plant,” Roger said with
intense sympathy. “In fact, what surprises me
is that nobody should ever have killed him before
this.”</p>

<p>“Do you imagine that people never thought of
that?” Mrs. Plant retorted passionately. “I did
myself. Hundreds of times! But what would
have been the use? Do you know what he did—in
my case, at any rate, and so in everyone else’s,
I suppose? He kept the documentary evidence
against me in a sealed envelope addressed to my
husband! He knew that if ever he met with a
violent death the safe would be opened by the
police, you see; and in that case they would take
charge of the envelope, and presumably many
other similar ones, and forward them all to their
destinations. Just imagine that! Naturally
nobody dared kill him; it would only make things
worse than before. He used to gloat over it to me.
Besides, he had always a loaded revolver in his
hand when he opened the safe, in my presence at
any rate. I can tell you, he took no chances. Oh,
Mr. Sheringham, that man was a fiend! Whatever
can have induced him to take his own life, I can’t
conceive; but believe me, I shall thank God for it
on my bended knees every night as long as I live!”</p>

<p>She sat biting her lip and breathing heavily in
the intensity of her feelings.</p>

<p>“But if you knew the evidence was kept in the
safe, why weren’t you frightened when it was being
opened by the inspector?” Roger asked curiously.
“I remember glancing at you, and you certainly
didn’t seem to be in the least perturbed about it.”</p>

<p>“Oh, that was after I’d had his letter, you see,”
Mrs. Plant explained readily. “I was before, of
course; terribly frightened. But not afterwards,
though it did seem almost too good to be true.
Hullo! isn’t that the lunch bell? We had better
be going indoors, hadn’t we? I think I have told
you all you can want to know.” She rose to her feet
and turned towards the house.</p>

<p>Roger fell into step with her.</p>

<p>“Letter?” he said eagerly. “What letter?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant glanced at him in surprise. “Oh,
don’t you know about that? I thought you must
do, as you seemed to know everything. Yes, I got
a letter from him saying that for certain private
reasons he had decided to take his own life, and
that before doing so he wished to inform me that
I need have no fears about anything, as he had
burnt the evidence he held against me. You can
imagine what a relief it was!”</p>

<p>“Jumping Moses!” Roger exclaimed blankly.
“That appears to bash me somewhat sideways!”</p>

<p>“<em>What</em> did you say, Mr. Sheringham?” asked
Mrs. Plant curiously.</p>

<p>Roger’s dazed and slightly incoherent reply is
not recorded.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch24">

<h2>CHAPTER XXIV. <br/> Mr. Sheringham is Disconcerted</h2>

<p>Roger sat through the first part of lunch in a
species of minor trance. It was not until the
necessity for consuming a large plateful of prunes
and tapioca pudding, the two things besides Jews
that he detested most in the world, began to
impress itself upon his consciousness, that the power
of connected thought returned to him. Mrs. Plant’s
revelation appeared temporarily to have numbed
his brain. The one thing which remained dazzlingly
clear to him was that if Stanworth had written a
letter announcing his impending suicide, then
Stanworth could not after all have been murdered;
and the whole imposing structure which he,
Roger, had erected, crumbled away into the
sand upon which it had been founded. It was a
disturbing reflection for one so blithely certain of
himself as Roger.</p>

<p>As soon as lunch was over and the discussion
regarding trains and the like at an end, he hurried
Alec upstairs to his bedroom to talk the matter
over. It is true that Roger felt a certain reluctance
to be compelled thus to acknowledge that he had
been busily unearthing nothing but a mare’s nest;
but, on the other hand, Alec must know sooner or
later, and at that moment the one vital necessity
from Roger’s point of view was to talk. In fact, the
pent-up floods of talk in Roger’s bosom that were
striving for exit had been causing him something
very nearly approaching physical pain during the
last few minutes.</p>

<p>“Alexander!” he exclaimed dramatically as soon
as the door was safely shut. “Alexander, the game
is up!”</p>

<p>“What do you mean?” Alec asked in surprise.
“Have the police got on the trail now?”</p>

<p>“Worse than that. Far worse! It appears that
old Stanworth was never murdered at all! He did
commit suicide, after all.”</p>

<p>Alec sat down heavily in the nearest chair.
“Good Lord!” he exclaimed limply. “But what
on earth makes you think that? I thought you
were so convinced that it was murder.”</p>

<p>“So I was,” Roger said, leaning against the
dressing table. “That’s what makes it all the more
extraordinary, because I really am very seldom
wrong. I say it in all modesty, but the fact is
indisputable. By all the laws of average, Stanworth
ought to have been murdered. It really is most
inexplicable.”</p>

<p>“But how do you know he wasn’t?” Alec
demanded. “What’s happened since I saw you
last to make you alter your mind like this?”</p>

<p>“The simple fact that Mrs. Plant received a note
from old Stanworth, saying that he was going to
kill himself for private reasons of his own or
something.”</p>

<p>“Oh!”</p>

<p>“I can tell you, it knocked me upside down for
the minute. Anything more unexpected I couldn’t
have imagined. And the trouble is that I don’t
see how we can possibly get round it. A note like
that is a very different matter to that statement.”</p>

<p>“You know, I’m not sure that I’m altogether
surprised that something like this has turned up,”
Alec said slowly. “I was never quite so convinced
by the murder idea as you were. After all, when
you come to look at all the facts of the case,
although they certainly seemed to be consistent
with murder, were no less consistent with suicide,
weren’t they?”</p>

<p>“So it appears,” Roger said regretfully.</p>

<p>“It was simply that you’d got the notion of
murder into your head—more picturesque, I
suppose—and everything had to be construed
to fit it, eh?”</p>

<p>“I suppose so.”</p>

<p>“In fact,” Alec concluded wisely, “it was an <i lang="fr">idée
fixe</i>, and everything else was sacrificed to it.
Isn’t that right?”</p>

<p>“Alexander, you put me to shame,” Roger
murmured.</p>

<p>“Well, anyhow, that shows you what comes of
muddling in other people’s affairs,” Alec pointed
out severely. “And it’s lucky you hit on the truth
before you made a still bigger idiot of yourself.”</p>

<p>“I deserve it all, I know,” Roger remarked
contritely to his hair-brush.</p>

<p>It was Alec’s turn to be complacent now, and he
was taking full advantage of it. As he lay back
leisurely in his chair and smoked away placidly,
he presented a perfect picture of “I told you so!”
Roger contemplated him in rueful silence.</p>

<p>“And yet——!” he murmured tentatively, after
a few moments’ silence.</p>

<p>Alec waved an admonitory pipe.</p>

<p>“Now, then!” he said warningly.</p>

<p>Roger exploded suddenly. “Well, say what you
like, Alec,” he burst out, “but the thing is dashed
queer! You can’t get away from it. After all, our
inquiries haven’t resulted in nothing, have they?
We did establish the fact that Stanworth was a
blackmailer. I forgot to tell you that, by the way.
We were perfectly right; he had been blackmailing
Mrs. Plant, the swine, and jolly badly, too.
Incidentally, she hadn’t the least idea that his death
might be anything else than suicide, and Jefferson
didn’t come into the library while she was there;
so I was wrong in that particular detail. I’m
satisfied she was telling the truth, too. But as for
the rest—well, I’m dashed if I know what to think!
The more I consider it, the more difficult I find it
to believe that it was suicide, after all, and that all
those other facts could have been nothing but
mere coincidences. It isn’t reasonable.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s all very well,” Alec said sagely.
“But when a fellow actually goes out of his way
to write a letter saying that——”</p>

<p>“By Jove, Alec!” Roger interrupted excitedly.
“You’ve given me an idea. <em>Did</em> he write it?”</p>

<p>“What do you mean?”</p>

<p>“Why, mightn’t it have been typed? I haven’t
seen the thing yet, you know, and when she
mentioned a letter it never occurred to me that it
might not be a hand-written one. If it was typed,
then there’s still a chance.” He walked rapidly
towards the door.</p>

<p>“Where are you going to now?” Alec asked in
surprise.</p>

<p>“To see if I can get a look at this blessed letter,”
Roger said, turning the handle. “Mrs. Plant’s
room is down this passage, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>With a quick glance up and down the passage,
Roger hurried along to Mrs. Plant’s bedroom and
tapped on the door.</p>

<p>“Come in,” said a voice inside.</p>

<p>“It’s me, Mrs. Plant,” he replied softly. “Mr.
Sheringham. Can I speak to you a minute?”</p>

<p>There came the sound of rapid footsteps crossing
the floor and Mrs. Plant’s head appeared at the
door.</p>

<p>“Yes?” she asked, not without a certain
apprehension. “What is it, Mr. Sheringham?”</p>

<p>“You remember that letter you mentioned this
morning? From Mr. Stanworth, I mean. Have
you still got it, by any chance, or have you
destroyed it?”</p>

<p>He held his breath for her reply.</p>

<p>“Oh, no. Of course I destroyed it at once.
Why?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I just wanted to test an idea. Let me see.”
He thought rapidly. “It was pushed under your
door or something, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no. It came by post.”</p>

<p>“Did it?” said Roger eagerly. “You didn’t
notice the postmark, did you?”</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact I did. It seemed so funny
that he should have taken the trouble to post it.
It was posted from the village by the eight-thirty
post that morning.”</p>

<p>“The village, was it? Oh! And was it
typewritten?”</p>

<p>“Yes.”</p>

<p>Roger held his breath again. “Was the signature
written or typewritten?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Plant considered.</p>

<p>“It was typewritten, as far as I remember.”</p>

<p>“Are you sure of that?” Roger asked eagerly.</p>

<p>“Ye-es, I think so. Oh, yes; I remember now.
The whole thing was typewritten, signature and
all.”</p>

<p>“Thank you very much, Mrs. Plant,” Roger said
gratefully. “That’s all I wanted to know.”</p>

<p>He sped back to his own room.</p>

<p>“Alexander!” he exclaimed dramatically, as
soon as he was inside. “Alexander, the game is
on again!”</p>

<p>“What’s up now?” Alec asked with a slight
frown.</p>

<p>“That letter sounds like a fake, just the same as
the confession. It was all typewritten, even the
signature, and it was posted from the village. Can
you imagine a man in his sane senses deliberately
going down to the village to post his letter, when
all he had to do was to push it under her door?”</p>

<p>“He might have had others to post as well,”
Alec hazarded, blowing out a great cloud of smoke.
“Would Mrs. Plant’s be the only one?”</p>

<p>“H’m! I never thought of that. Yes, he would.
But still, it’s rather unlikely that he should have
posted hers as well, I should say. By the way, it
was that letter which accounted for her change of
attitude before lunch. She knew then that she had
nothing to fear from the opening of the safe, you
see.”</p>

<p>“Well, how do matters stand now?”</p>

<p>“Exactly as they did before. I don’t see that
this really affects it either way. It’s only another
instance of the murderer’s cunning. Mrs. Plant,
and possibly, as you say, one or two others, might
raise awkward questions at Stanworth’s sudden
death; therefore their apprehensions must be
allayed. All that it really does as far as we are
concerned, is to confirm the idea that the murderer
must have a very intimate knowledge of
Stanworth’s private affairs. Of course it shows that the
safe <em>was</em> opened that night, and it brings our old
friends, the ashes in the hearth, into prominence
once more as being in all probability the remains of
the blackmailer’s evidence. Curious that that first
guess of mine should have turned out to be so near
the truth, isn’t it?”</p>

<p>“And what about Jefferson?” Alec asked
quietly.</p>

<p>“Ah, yes, Jefferson. Well, I suppose this affair
of the letter and the fact that he did not break in on
Mrs. Plant and Stanworth in the library that night
and consequently was not helped by that lady—I
suppose all this gives him credit for rather more
brains than I had been willing to concede him; but
otherwise I don’t see that his position is affected.”</p>

<p>“You mean, you still think he killed
Stanworth?”</p>

<p>“If he didn’t, can you tell me who did?”</p>

<p>Alec shrugged his shoulders. “I’ve told you I’m
convinced you’re barking up the wrong tree. It’s
no good going on repeating it.”</p>

<p>“Not a bit,” Roger said cheerfully.</p>

<p>“So what are you going to do?”</p>

<p>“Exactly what I was before. Have a little chat
with him.”</p>

<p>“Rather ticklish business, isn’t it? I mean,
when you’re so very uncertain of your ground.”</p>

<p>“Possibly. But so was Mrs. Plant for that
matter. I think I shall be able to handle friend Jefferson
all right. I shall be perfectly candid with him, and
I’m willing to wager a small sum that I shall be
back here within half an hour with his confession
in my pocket.”</p>

<p>“Humph!” Alec observed sceptically. “Are
you going to accuse him directly of the
murder?”</p>

<p>“My dear Alec! Nothing so crude as that. I
shan’t even say in so many words that I know a
murder has been committed. I shall simply ask
him a few pointed and extremely pertinent
questions. He’ll see the drift of them all right;
Master Jefferson is no fool, as we have every reason
to know. Then we shall be able to get down to
things.”</p>

<p>“Well, for goodness’ sake do bear in mind the
possibility (I won’t put it any stronger than that)
that Jefferson never did kill Stanworth at all, and
walk warily.”</p>

<p>“Trust me for that,” Roger replied complacently.
“By the way, did I tell you that Mrs. Plant
received that letter just before going into lunch? It
caught the eight-thirty post from the village.”</p>

<p>“Did it?” Alec said without very much interest.</p>

<p>“By Jove!” Roger exclaimed suddenly. “What
an idiot I am! That’s conclusive proof that
Stanworth couldn’t have posted it himself, isn’t it?
Fancy my never spotting that point before!”</p>

<p>“What point?”</p>

<p>“Why, the first post out from the village is five
o’clock. That letter must have been posted between
five and eight-thirty—four hours or more after
Stanworth was dead!”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch25">

<h2>CHAPTER XXV. <br/> The Mystery Finally Refuses to Accept Mr. Sheringham’s Solution</h2>

<p>Roger had no time to waste. Mrs. Plant, Alec,
and himself were all to leave by the train soon after
five o’clock; the car would be ready to take them
into Elchester at half-past four. Tea was to be at
four, and the time was already close on three. He
had an hour left in which to disentangle the last
remaining threads. As he stood for a moment
outside the morning-room door it seemed to Roger as
if even this narrow margin were half an hour more
than he needed.</p>

<p>Jefferson was still at work among the piled-up
papers. He glanced up abstractedly as Roger
entered the room and then smiled slightly.</p>

<p>“Come to offer me a hand again?” he asked.
“Devilish good of you, but I’m afraid there’s
absolutely nothing I can turn over to you this
time.”</p>

<p>Roger drew a chair up to the other side of the
table and seated himself deliberately.</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact, I hadn’t,” he said slowly.
“I wanted to ask you one or two questions,
Jefferson, if you would be good enough to answer them.”</p>

<p>Jefferson looked slightly surprised.</p>

<p>“Questions? All right, fire away. What can I
tell you?”</p>

<p>“Well, the first thing I want to ask you,” Roger
shot out, “is—where were you at the time that
Stanworth died?”</p>

<p>A look of blank astonishment was followed in
Jefferson’s face by an angry flush.</p>

<p>“And what the devil has that got to do with
you?” he asked abruptly.</p>

<p>“Never mind for the moment what it has to do
with me,” Roger replied, his heart beating a little
faster than usual. “I want you to answer that
question.”</p>

<p>Jefferson rose slowly to his feet, his eyes
glittering ominously. “Do you want me to kick you out of
the room?” he said in a strangely quiet voice.</p>

<p>Roger leaned back in his chair and watched him
unmoved.</p>

<p>“Do I understand that you refuse to answer?”
he said evenly. “You refuse to tell me where you
were between, say, one and three o’clock on the
morning that Stanworth died?”</p>

<p>“Most decidedly I do. And I want to know what
the hell you think that has to do with you?”</p>

<p>“It may have nothing and it may have
everything,” Roger said calmly. “But I advise you
to tell me, if not for your own sake at least for the
lady’s.”</p>

<p>If this was a chance shot, it had certainly got
home. Jefferson’s face took on a deeper tinge and
his eyes widened in sheer fury. He clenched his
fists till the knuckles showed up white and
menacing.</p>

<p>“Damn you, Sheringham, that’s about enough!”
he muttered, advancing towards the other. “I
don’t know what the devil you think you’re playing
at, but——”</p>

<p>A sudden bluff darted into Roger’s mind. After
all, what was a man like Jefferson doing as
secretary to a man like Stanworth? He decided to risk it.</p>

<p>“Before you do anything rash, Jefferson,” he
said quickly, “I’d like to ask you another question.
What was Stanworth blackmailing you for?”</p>

<p>There are times when bluff pays. This was one
of them. Jefferson stopped short in his stride, his
hands fell limply to his sides and his jaw drooped
open. It was as if he had been struck by a sudden
and unexpected bullet.</p>

<p>“Sit down and let’s talk things over quietly,”
Roger advised, and Jefferson resumed his seat
without a word.</p>

<p>Roger reviewed the situation rapidly in his mind.</p>

<p>“You see,” he began in conversational tones,
“I know quite a lot of what’s been going on here,
and in the circumstances I really have no alternative
but to find out the rest. I admit that it places
me in rather an awkward situation, but I can’t see
that I can very well do anything else. Now what I
suggest, Jefferson, is that we both put our cards
on the table and talk the thing over as two men of
the world. Do you agree?”</p>

<p>Jefferson frowned. “You don’t appear to give
me much option, do you? Though what it has to
do with you, I’m really hanged if I can see.”</p>

<p>It was on Roger’s lips to retort that Jefferson
would very probably be hanged if he didn’t, but
fortunately he was able to control himself.</p>

<p>“I should have thought that would have been
obvious,” he said smoothly. “I can hardly leave
things as they are, can I? Still, we’ll pass over
that for the present. Now Stanworth was, as I
know, a blackmailer, and there can be no doubt
as to that affecting the situation in no small
degree.”</p>

<p>“What situation?” Jefferson asked in puzzled
tones.</p>

<p>Roger glanced at him shrewdly. “<em>The</em> situation,”
he said firmly. “I think we both understand to
what I am referring.”</p>

<p>“I’m blessed if I do,” Jefferson retorted.</p>

<p>“Of course if you take up that attitude——!”
Roger said tentatively. “Still, perhaps it’s a little
early to get down to brass tacks,” he added, after
a moment’s pause. “We’ll confine ourselves to
the other aspect for a time, shall we? Now
Stanworth, I take it, had some definite hold over you.
Would you mind telling me exactly what that
was?”</p>

<p>“Is this necessary?” Jefferson demanded shortly.
“My private affair, you know. Why the deuce
should you want to concern yourself in it?”</p>

<p>“Don’t talk like that, Jefferson, please. You
must see what course you’ll force on me if you do.”</p>

<p>“Damned if I do! What course?”</p>

<p>“To put the whole thing in the hands of the
police, naturally.”</p>

<p>Jefferson started violently. “Good God, you
wouldn’t do that, Sheringham!”</p>

<p>“I don’t want to do so, of course. But you
really must be frank with me. Now please tell
me all about your relations with Stanworth. I may
tell you, to save you trouble, that I am already in
full possession of all the similar facts with regard
to—well, the lady in the case.”</p>

<p>“The devil you are!” Jefferson exclaimed in
undisguised astonishment. “Oh, well, if I’ve got
to tell you, I suppose I must. Though what in the
name of goodness it can have to—— However!”</p>

<p>He leaned back in his chair and began to fiddle
abstractedly with the papers in front of him.</p>

<p>“It was this way. My regiment was in India.
Pal of mine and I were both in love with the same
girl. No bad blood or anything like that. Good
friends all the time. He got her. Wanted to get
married at once, but very hard up, of course. We
all were. He’d got a lot of debts, too. Damned
fool went and drew a check on another man’s
account. Forged it, if you like. Absurd thing to
do; bound to come out. There was a hell of a row,
but we managed to keep it confined to a few of
us. Chap came and confessed to me; asked what
on earth he’d better do. They hadn’t found
out who’d done it yet, but when they did it would
be all up with him. Lose the girl and everything;
she was fond enough of him, but straight as a die
herself. Couldn’t have stood the disgrace. Well,
what could I do? Couldn’t stand by and see all
this happen. Went to the colonel and told him I’d
done the blessed thing. Only thing to do.”</p>

<p>“By Jove, you sportsman!” Roger exclaimed
involuntarily.</p>

<p>“Sportsman be damned! Wouldn’t have done
it for him alone. I was thinking of the girl.”</p>

<p>“And what happened?”</p>

<p>“Oh, it was hushed up as much as possible. I
had to send in my papers, of course, but the fellow
didn’t prosecute. Then that hound Stanworth
got wind of the story somehow and managed to
lay his hands on the check, which had never been
destroyed. Perfect godsend to him, of course.
Gave me choice of taking on this job with him or
letting the whole thing be passed on to the police.
No alternative. I had to take on the job.”</p>

<p>“But why on earth did he want you as his
secretary? That’s what I can’t understand.”</p>

<p>“Simple enough. He wanted to push his way
in among the sort of people I knew. I was a sort
of social sponsor for him. Damned unpleasant job,
of course, but what could I do? Besides, when I
took the job on I didn’t know anything about him.
Thought he was just a new-rich merchant and I
was his only victim in the threatening line. Soon
found out, of course; but too late to back out then.
That’s all. Satisfied?”</p>

<p>“Perfectly. Sorry I had to ask you, but you see
how it is. Well, I’m dashed if I can blame you.
I’d have done the same thing myself. But I’d like
to have the story of it from your own lips.”</p>

<p>“Just told you the story.”</p>

<p>“No, the other one, I mean.”</p>

<p>“What other one?”</p>

<p>“Oh, don’t beat about the bush like this. You
know perfectly well what I’m driving at. I’ll put
it in the original form, if you like. Where were you
during the night that Stanworth died?”</p>

<p>Jefferson’s angry flush returned.</p>

<p>“Now look here, Sheringham, that’s too much.
I’ve told you things I never dreamed I’d have
to tell anyone, and I’m not going to have you
probing any farther into my business. That’s
final.”</p>

<p>Roger rose to his feet. “I’m sorry you take it
like that, Jefferson,” he said quietly. “You leave
me no alternative.”</p>

<p>“What are you going to do then?”</p>

<p>“Tell the police the whole story.”</p>

<p>“Are you mad, Sheringham?” Jefferson burst
out angrily.</p>

<p>“No, but I think you are, not to trust me,”
Roger retorted, hardly less so. “You don’t think
I want to tell them, do you? It’s you who are
forcing me to do so.”</p>

<p>“What, through not telling you what—what I
was doing that night?”</p>

<p>“Of course.”</p>

<p>There was a short pause, while the two glared
at each other.</p>

<p>“Come back in a quarter of an hour,” Jefferson
said abruptly. “I’ll think it over. Have to
consult her, of course, first.”</p>

<p>Roger nodded acquiescence to this proposal and
hurried out of the room. Exultantly he sought
Alec.</p>

<p>“I told you so, Alexander,” he cried triumphantly,
as soon as he was fairly inside the room.
“Jefferson’s on the point of confession!”</p>

<p>“He’s not!” Alec exclaimed incredulously.</p>

<p>“He is indeed. And there’s a lot more to it
than that. I’ve bluffed him into believing that I
know a lot more than I do really, and he’s going
to tell me all sorts of other things as well. He’s
let one cat out of the bag already. I can tell you.
Mrs. Plant is in it, after all!”</p>

<p>“Oh, rot!” Alec replied with decision. “That’s
out of the question. I know she isn’t.”</p>

<p>“Don’t be so absurd, Alexander,” Roger
retorted somewhat nettled. “How can you possibly
know?”</p>

<p>“Well, anyhow, I’m sure she isn’t,” Alec replied
obstinately.</p>

<p>“But my dear chap, friend Jefferson has just
gone off to consult her as to whether he shall tell
me the whole story or not. I threatened him with
the police, you see, if he didn’t.”</p>

<p>“I suppose you taxed him outright with the
murder, did you?”</p>

<p>“No, Alexander, I didn’t,” Roger answered
wearily. “The word murder was never so much
as mentioned. I simply put it that I wanted to
know what he was doing on the night of
Stanworth’s death.”</p>

<p>“And he wouldn’t tell you?” Alec asked,
somewhat surprisedly.</p>

<p>“He certainly would not. But he told me a
lot of other things. He was in Stanworth’s power
all right. I haven’t got time to tell you the whole
story, but there’s motive enough for him to kill
Stanworth himself, even without the introduction
of Mrs. Plant’s side of it. Oh, the whole thing’s as
plain as a pikestaff. I can’t understand why you’re
so sceptical about it all.”</p>

<p>“Perhaps I make a better detective than you do,
Roger,” Alec laughed, a trifle constrainedly.</p>

<p>“Perhaps,” Roger said without very much conviction.
He glanced at his watch. “Well, I’d better
be getting back. I wonder if you’d believe it if I
showed you Jefferson’s confession in writing!
Would you?”</p>

<p>“I very much doubt it,” Alec smiled.</p>

<p>Jefferson was no longer alone in the morning
room when Roger returned to it. To the latter’s
surprise Lady Stanworth was also there. She was
standing with her back to the window and did not
look round at his entrance. Roger shut the door
carefully behind him and looked inquiringly at
Jefferson.</p>

<p>That gentleman did not waste time.</p>

<p>“We’ve talked the matter over,” he said curtly,
“and decided to tell you what you want to know.”</p>

<p>Roger could hardly repress an exclamation of
surprise. Why should Jefferson have imported Lady
Stanworth into the matter? Obviously she must be
involved, and deeply, too. Could it be that
Jefferson had taken her into his confidence with regard
to Mrs. Plant? How much did she know, if that
were the case? Presumably everything. Roger
felt that the situation was about to prove not a
little awkward.</p>

<p>“I’m glad,” he murmured, half apologetically.</p>

<p>Jefferson was carrying the thing off well. Not
only did he appear to be feeling no fear at all, but
his manner was not even that of defiance. The
attitude he had adopted and which sat perfectly
naturally upon him was rather one of dignified
condescension.</p>

<p>“But before I answer you, Sheringham,” he said
stiffly, “I should like to say, both on behalf of this
lady and myself, that we consider——”</p>

<p>Lady Stanworth turned to him. “Please!”
she said quietly. “I don’t think we need go into
that. If Mr. Sheringham is incapable of
understanding the position into which he has forced us,
there can hardly be any need to labour the point.”</p>

<p>“Quite, quite,” Roger murmured still more
apologetically, and feeling unaccountably small.
Lady Stanworth was perhaps the only person in
the world who consistently had that effect upon
him.</p>

<p>“Very well,” Jefferson bowed. He turned to
Roger. “You wanted to know where I was on the
night that Stanworth shot himself?”</p>

<p>“On the night of Stanworth’s death,” Roger
corrected, with a slight smile.</p>

<p>“On the night of Stanworth’s death then,”
Jefferson said impatiently. “Same thing. As I
said before, I fail entirely to see how it can concern
you, but we have decided under the circumstances
to tell you. After all, the fact will be common
knowledge soon enough now. I was with my wife.”</p>

<p>“Your <em>wife</em>?” Roger echoed, scarcely able to
believe his ears.</p>

<p>“That is what I said,” Jefferson replied coldly.
“Lady Stanworth and I were married secretly
nearly six months ago.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch26">

<h2>CHAPTER XXVI. <br/> Mr. Grierson Tries His Hand</h2>

<p>For some moments Roger was incapable of speech.
This disclosure was so totally unexpected, so
entirely the reverse of anything that he had ever
imagined, that at first it literally took his breath
away. He could only stand and stare, as if his eyes
were about to pop out of his head, at the two
entirely unmoved persons who had sprung this
overwhelming surprise upon him.</p>

<p>“Is that what you wished to know?” Jefferson
asked courteously. “Or would you wish my wife
to confirm it?”</p>

<p>“Oh, no; no need at all,” Roger gasped, doing
his best to pull himself together. “I—I should
like to apologise to you for the apparent
impertinence of my questions and to—to congratulate
you, if you will allow me to do so.”</p>

<p>“Very kind,” Jefferson muttered. Lady
Stanworth, or Lady Jefferson as she was now, bowed
slightly.</p>

<p>“If you don’t want me any more, Harry,” she
said to her husband, “there are one or two things
I have to do.”</p>

<p>“Certainly,” Jefferson said, opening the door for
her.</p>

<p>She passed out without another glance at Roger.</p>

<p>“Look here, Jefferson,” exclaimed the latter
impulsively, as soon as the door was closed again,
“I know you must be thinking me the most
appalling bounder, but you must believe that I shouldn’t
have tackled you in that way if I hadn’t got very
solid and serious reasons for doing so. As things
have turned out, I can’t tell you at present what
those reasons are; but really it’s something of the
greatest possible importance.”</p>

<p>“Oh, that’s all right, Sheringham,” Jefferson
returned with gruff amiability. “Guessed you
must have something up your sleeve. Bit awkward,
though. Ladies, and all that, y’know,” he added
vaguely.</p>

<p>“Beastly,” Roger said sympathetically. “As
a matter of fact, that’s a development that had
never occurred to me at all, you and Lady
Stanworth being married. If anything, it makes things
very much more complicated than before.”</p>

<p>“Bit of a mystery or something on hand, eh?”
Jefferson asked with interest.</p>

<p>“Very much so,” Roger replied, gazing
thoughtfully out of the window. “Connected with
Stanworth, and—and his activities, you understand,”
he added.</p>

<p>“Ah!” Jefferson observed comprehendingly.
“Then I’d better not ask any questions. Don’t
want to learn anything more about that side of
things. Seen too many poor devils going through
it already.”</p>

<p>“No, but I tell you what,” Roger said, wheeling
suddenly about. “If you could answer a few more
questions for me, I should be more than grateful.
Only as a favour, of course, and if you refuse I shall
understand perfectly. But you might be able to
help me clear up a very tricky state of affairs.”</p>

<p>“If it’s anything to do with helping somebody
Stanworth got hold of, I’ll answer questions all
night,” Jefferson replied with vigour. “Go ahead.”</p>

<p>“Thanks, very much. Well, then, in the first
place, will you tell me some details regarding your
wife’s relations with Stanworth? It doesn’t matter
if you object, but I should be very glad if you could
see your way to do so.”</p>

<p>“But I thought you said you knew that story?”</p>

<p>Roger did not think it necessary to explain that
the lady to whom he had been referring was not
Lady Jefferson. “Oh, I know most of it, I think,”
he said airily, “but I should like to hear it all from
you, if I could. I know that she was in Stanworth’s
power, of course,” he added, making a shot in the
twilight, “but I’m not quite clear as to the precise
way.”</p>

<p>Jefferson shrugged his shoulders. “Oh, well,
as you seem to know so much, you’d better have
the whole lot straight. Stanworth nosed out
something about her father. His brother was in
love with her, and Stanworth gave her the option
of marrying him or having her father shown up.
He could have had the old earl put in the dock, I
believe. Naturally she chose the brother, who,
by the way, didn’t know anything about
Stanworth’s activities, so I understand. Quite an
amiable, rather weak sort of a fellow.”</p>

<p>“And since then, of course, Stanworth had the
whip hand over her?”</p>

<p>Jefferson winced. “Yes,” he said shortly. “Even
after her father died, she wouldn’t want the family
shown up.”</p>

<p>“I see,” said Roger thoughtfully. So Lady
Stanworth had little enough reason to love her
brother-in-law. And since Jefferson fell in love
with her, her cause would naturally become his.
Truly he had motive and to spare for ridding the
world of such a man. Yet, although Jefferson and
his wife might easily have concocted the story of
his whereabouts that night, Roger already felt just
as convinced of the former’s innocence as he was
before of his guilt. The man’s manner seemed
somehow to preclude altogether the idea of
subterfuge. Had he really killed Stanworth, Roger was
sure that he would have said so by the time
that matters had reached this length, bluntly
and simply, just as he had told the story of his own
downfall.</p>

<p>But in spite of his convictions, Roger was not
such a fool as not to put the obvious questions that
occurred to him.</p>

<p>“Why was your marriage secret?” he asked.
“Did Stanworth know about it?”</p>

<p>“No; he wouldn’t have allowed it. It would
have looked like a combination against him. He
wanted us separate, for his own ends.”</p>

<p>“Did you hear the shot that killed him?” Roger
said suddenly.</p>

<p>“No. About two o’clock, wasn’t it? I’d been
asleep two hours.”</p>

<p>“You did sleep with your wife then, in spite of
the necessity of preserving secrecy?”</p>

<p>“Her maid knew. Used to go back to my room
in the early morning. Beastly hole-and-corner
business, but no alternative.”</p>

<p>“And only Stanworth’s death could have freed
you, so to speak?” Roger mused. “Very opportune,
wasn’t it?”</p>

<p>“Very,” Jefferson replied laconically. “You
think I forced him somehow to shoot himself, don’t
you?”</p>

<p>“Well, I—I——” Roger stammered, completely
taken aback.</p>

<p>Jefferson smiled grimly. “Knew you must have
some comic idea in your head. Just seen what
you’ve been driving at. Well, you can rest assured
I didn’t. For the simple reason that nobody or no
threats on earth could have made him do a thing
like that. Why he did it, Heaven only knows.
Complete mystery to me. Can’t fathom it. Thank
God he did, though!”</p>

<p>“You don’t think he might have
been—murdered?” Roger suggested tentatively.</p>

<p>“Murdered? How could he have been? Out
of the question under the circumstances. Besides,
he took jolly good care of that. I’d have murdered
him myself before this—hundreds of times!—if I
hadn’t known it would make things worse than
before all round.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I’ve heard about that. Kept the evidence
addressed to the interested parties, didn’t he? I
suppose everyone knew that?”</p>

<p>“You bet they did. He rubbed it in. No,
Stanworth never meant to be murdered. But my God,
I had a fright when I saw him lying there dead and
the safe locked.”</p>

<p>“You were going to try and open it when I
interrupted you yesterday morning, of course?”</p>

<p>“Yes, properly caught out then,” Jefferson
smiled ruefully. “But even if I’d found the keys,
I didn’t know the combination. Lord, what a relief
that note of his was. You know about that, I
suppose?”</p>

<p>“You got a note by the post before lunch, did
you?”</p>

<p>“That’s right. Saying he was going to kill
himself. Rum business. Can’t explain it. Almost
too good to be true. I feel another man.”</p>

<p>“And so are a good many other people, I
imagine,” Roger said softly. “And women, too. His
activities were fairly widespread, weren’t they?”</p>

<p>“Very, I believe. Never knew much about it,
though. He kept all that sort of thing to himself.”</p>

<p>“That butler now,” Roger hazarded. “He
looks a pretty tough customer. I suppose
Stanworth employed him as a sort of bodyguard?”</p>

<p>“Yes, something like that. But I don’t know
about ‘employed.’ ”</p>

<p>“What do you mean?”</p>

<p>“He was no more employed than I was. That
is to say, we got a salary and we did our work, but
it wasn’t a sort of employment either of us could
leave.”</p>

<p>Roger whistled softly. “Oho! So friend Graves
was another victim, was he? What’s his story?”</p>

<p>“Don’t know all the details, but Stanworth
could have had that man hanged, I believe,”
Jefferson said coolly. “Instead he preferred to use
him as a sort of bodyguard, as you say.”</p>

<p>“I see. Then Graves hadn’t much cause to love
him either, I take it?”</p>

<p>“If he hadn’t known what would happen
afterwards, I wouldn’t have given Stanworth ten
minutes of life in Graves’s presence.”</p>

<p>Roger whistled again.</p>

<p>“Well, thanks very much, Jefferson. I think
that’s all I wanted to know.”</p>

<p>“If you’re trying to look for someone who
induced Stanworth to shoot himself, you’re wasting
your time,” Jefferson remarked. “Couldn’t be
done.”</p>

<p>“Oh, there’s a little more in my quest than
that,” Roger smiled, as he let himself out of the
room.</p>

<p>He hurried upstairs, glancing at his watch as he
did so. The time was nearly five minutes to four.
He scurried down the passage to Alec’s room.</p>

<p>“Finished packing?” he asked, putting his
head round the door. “Good, well come along to
my room while I do mine.”</p>

<p>“Well?” Alec asked sarcastically, when they
were once more ensconced in Roger’s bedroom.
“Has Jefferson written out his confession?”</p>

<p>Roger paused in the act of laying his suitcase on
a chair.</p>

<p>“Alec,” he said solemnly, “I owe friend Jefferson
an apology, though I can’t very well tender it. I
was hopelessly wrong about him, and you were
hopelessly right. He didn’t kill Stanworth at all.
It’s extremely annoying of him considering how
neatly I solved this little problem of ours; but
there’s the fact.”</p>

<p>“Humph!” Alec observed. “I won’t <em>say</em>, ‘I
told you so,’ because I know how annoying it
would be for you. But I don’t mind telling you that
I’m thinking it hard.”</p>

<p>“Yes, and the most irritating part is that
you’re fully entitled to do so,” Roger said, throwing
his pyjamas into the case. “That’s what I find so
irksome.”</p>

<p>“But I suppose you’ve found somebody else
to take his place all right?”</p>

<p>“No, I haven’t. Isn’t it maddening? But I’ll
tell you one significant fact I’ve unearthed. That
butler had as much cause as anyone, if not more,
to regret the fact that Stanworth was still polluting
the earth.”</p>

<p>“Had he? Oh! But look here, how do you
know that Jefferson didn’t do it?”</p>

<p>Roger explained.</p>

<p>“Not much so far as actual hard-and-fast-evidence
goes, I’m afraid,” he concluded, “but we
greater detectives are above evidence. It’s
psychology that we study, and I feel in every single bone in
my body that Jefferson was telling the truth.”</p>

<p>“Lady Stanworth!” Alec commented. “Good
Lord!”</p>

<p>“Some men are brave, aren’t they? Still, I
daresay she’ll make an excellent wife; I believe
that’s the right thing to say on this sort of occasion.
But seriously, Alec, I’m absolutely baffled again.
I think I shall have to turn the case over to
you.”</p>

<p>“Well, do,” Alec retorted with unexpected
energy, “and I’ll tell you who killed Stanworth.”</p>

<p>Roger desisted from his efforts to close the lid
of his bulging case in order to look up in surprise.</p>

<p>“You will, eh? Well, who did?”</p>

<p>“Some unknown victim of Stanworth’s
blackmail, of course. The whole thing stands to reason.
We were looking for a mysterious stranger at first,
weren’t we? And we thought he might be a
burglar. Translate the burglar into the blackmailer’s
victim and there you are. And as he burnt the
evidence himself, and we haven’t the least idea
who was on Stanworth’s blackmailing list, we shall
never find out who he was. The whole thing seems
as clear as daylight to me.”</p>

<p>Roger turned to his refractory case again. “But
why did we give up the burglar idea?” he asked.
“Aren’t you rather overlooking that? Chiefly
because of the disappearance of those footprints.
That must mean either that the murderer came
from inside the house or that he had an accomplice
there.”</p>

<p>“I don’t agree with you. We don’t know how
or why the footprints disappeared. It might have
been pure chance. William might have raked the
bed over, somebody might have noticed it and
smoothed it out; there are plenty of possible
explanations for that.”</p>

<p>With a heave Roger succeeded in clicking the
lock with which he was struggling. He straightened
his bent back and drew his pipe out of his pocket.</p>

<p>“I’ve talked enough for a bit,” he announced.</p>

<p>“Oh, rot!” Alec exclaimed incredulously.</p>

<p>“And it’s about time I put in a little thinking,”
Roger went on, disregarding the interruption.
“You run along down to tea, Alexander; you’re
ten minutes late as it is.”</p>

<p>“And what are you going to do?”</p>

<p>“I’m going to spend my last twenty minutes
here doing some high-speed cogitating in the back
garden. Then I shall be ready to chat with you
in the train.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I have a kind of idea that you’ll be quite
ready to do that,” said Alec rudely, as they went
out into the passage.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch27">

<h2>CHAPTER XXVII. <br/> Mr. Sheringham Hits the Mark</h2>

<p>Roger did not reappear until the car was at the
front door and the other members of the party
already making their farewells on the steps. His
leave-taking was necessarily a little hurried; but
perhaps this was not altogether without design.
Roger did not feel at all inclined to linger in the
society of Lady Jefferson.</p>

<p>He shook hands warmly enough with her
husband, however, and the manner of their parting
was sufficient to assure the latter, without the
necessity of any words being spoken on the subject, that
his confidences would be regarded as inviolate.
The taciturn Jefferson became almost effusive in
return.</p>

<p>Arrived at the station, Roger personally
superintended the purchase of the tickets and deftly
shepherded Mrs. Plant into a non-smoking carriage
explaining that the cigars which he and Alec
proposed to smoke would spell disaster to the
subtleties of <i lang="fr">Parfum Jasmine</i>. A short but interesting
conversation with the guard, followed by the
exchange of certain pieces of silver, ensured the
locking of the door of their own first-class smoker.</p>

<p>“And so ends an extremely interesting little
visit,” Roger observed as soon as the train started,
leaning back luxuriously in his corner and putting
his feet on the seat. “Well, I shan’t be sorry to
get back to London, on the whole, I must say,
though the country is all very well in its way. I
always think you ought to take the country in
small doses to appreciate it properly, don’t you?”</p>

<p>“No,” said Alec.</p>

<p>“Or look at it in comfort from the windows of a
train,” Roger went on, waving an appreciative
hand towards the countryside through which they
were passing. “Fields, woods, streams, barley——”</p>

<p>“That isn’t barley. It’s wheat.”</p>

<p>“—barley, trees—delightful, my dear Alexander!
But how much more delightful seen like this in one
charming flash, that leaves a picture printed on the
brain only to give way the next instant to another
equally charming one, than stuck down in the
middle, for instance, of one of those fields of
barley——”</p>

<p>“Wheat.”</p>

<p>“—of barley, with the prospect of a ten-mile
walk in this blazing sunshine between you and the
next long drink. Don’t you agree?”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>“I thought you wouldn’t. But reflect.
Sunshine, considered from the purely æsthetic point
of view, is, I am quite willing to grant you, a thing
of——”</p>

<p>“What <em>are</em> you talking about?” Alec asked
despairingly.</p>

<p>“Sunshine, Alexander,” returned Roger blandly.</p>

<p>“Well, for goodness’ sake stop talking about
sunshine. What I want to know is, have you got
any farther?”</p>

<p>Roger was evidently in one of his maddening
moods.</p>

<p>“What with?” he asked blankly.</p>

<p>“The Stanworth affair of course, you idiot!”
shouted the exasperated Alec.</p>

<p>“Ah, yes, of course. The Stanworth affair,”
Roger replied innocently. “Did I do that bit well,
Alec?” he asked with a sudden change of tone.</p>

<p>“What bit?”</p>

<p>“When I said, ‘What with?’ Did I say it with
an air of bland innocence? The best detectives
always do, you know. When they reach this stage
of the proceedings they always pretend to have
forgotten all about the case in hand. Why they
do so, I’ve never been able to imagine; but it’s
evidently the correct etiquette for the job. By
the way, Alec,” he added kindly, “you did your
part very well. The idiot friend always shouts in an
irritated and peevish way like that. I really think
we make quite a model pair, don’t you?”</p>

<p>“Will you stop yapping and tell me whether
you’ve got any farther with Stanworth’s murder?”
Alec demanded doggedly.</p>

<p>“Oh, <em>that</em>?” said Roger with studied carelessness.
“I solved that exactly forty-three minutes
ago.”</p>

<p>“<em>What?</em>”</p>

<p>“I said that I solved the mystery exactly
forty-three minutes ago. And a few odd seconds, of
course. It was an interesting little problem in its
way, my dear Alexander Watson, but absurdly
simple once one had grasped the really vital factor
in the case. For some extraordinary reason I
appeared to have overlooked it before; hence the
delay. But don’t put that bit in when you come
to write up the case, or I shall never land the next
vacancy for a stolen-crown-jewels recoverer to an
influential emperor.”</p>

<p>“You’ve solved it, have you?” Alec growled
sceptically. “I seem to have heard something like
that before.”</p>

<p>“Meaning Jefferson? Yes, I admit I backed the
wrong horse there. But this is a very different
matter. I’ve really solved it this time.”</p>

<p>“Oh? Well, let’s hear it.”</p>

<p>“With the greatest pleasure,” Roger responded
heartily. “Let me see now. Where shall I begin?
Well, I think I’ve told you all the really important
things that I managed to elicit from Mrs. Plant and
Jefferson, haven’t I? Except one.” Roger dropped
his bantering manner with startling suddenness.
“Alec,” he said seriously, “that man Stanworth
was as choice a scoundrel as I’ve ever heard of.
What I didn’t tell you is that he gave Mrs. Plant
three months in which to find two hundred and
fifty pounds for him; and hinted that if she hadn’t
got it already, a pretty woman like her would have
no difficulty in laying her hands on it.”</p>

<p>“Good God!” Alec breathed.</p>

<p>“He even went farther than that and offered to
introduce her to a rich man out of whom she would
be able to wheedle it, if she played her cards
properly. Oh, I tell you, shooting was much too easy a
death for friend Stanworth. And the person who
did it ought to be acclaimed as a public benefactor,
instead of being hanged by a grateful country; as
he certainly would be, if all this had got into the
hands of the police.”</p>

<p>“You can hardly expect the law to recognise
the principle of poetic justice for all that,” Alec
objected.</p>

<p>“I don’t see why not,” Roger retorted.
“However, we won’t go into that at present. Well, to
my mind there were two chief difficulties in this
Stanworth business. The first one was that at the
beginning there didn’t seem to be any definite
motive for killing him; and afterwards, when we’d
found out about him, there were far too many. All
those people in the house, Mrs. Plant, Jefferson,
Lady Stanworth, the butler (who, by the way,
appears to be a murderer in a small way already,
as I gather from Jefferson; that was the hold which
Stanworth had over him)—all of them had every
reason to kill him; and the case began to take on
the aspect not so much of proving who did it, but,
by a process of elimination, of finding out who
didn’t. In that way I managed eventually to
dismiss Mrs. Plant, Jefferson, and Lady Stanworth.
But besides the people actually under our noses in
the house, there were all the others—goodness only
knows how many of them!—of whose very existence
we knew nothing; all his other victims.”</p>

<p>“Were there many of them, then?”</p>

<p>“I understand that Stanworth’s practice was a
fairly extensive one,” Roger replied ironically.
“Anyhow, I was able to narrow down the field to a
certain extent. Then I began to go over once more
the evidence we had collected. The question I
kept asking myself was—is there a single item that
gives a definite pointer towards any certain person,
male or female?”</p>

<p>“Female?” Roger repeated surprisedly.</p>

<p>“Certainly. In spite of everything—the footprint
in the flower bed, for example—I was still
keeping before me the possibility of a woman being
mixed up in it. It didn’t seem altogether probable,
but I couldn’t afford to lose sight of the bare
possibility. And it’s lucky I did, for it was just that
which finally put me on the right track.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord!”</p>

<p>“Yes; I admit I was slow in the up-take, for
the fact had been staring me in the face the whole
time, and I never spotted it. You see, the key to
the whole mystery was that there was a <em>second</em>
woman in the library that night.”</p>

<p>“How on earth do you know that?” Alec asked
in consternation.</p>

<p>“By the hair we found on the settee. I put it
away in the envelope, you remember, and promptly
forgot all about it, assuming it to have been one of
Mrs. Plant’s. It struck me suddenly in the garden
just now that it wasn’t anything of the sort;
Mrs. Plant’s hair is very much darker. Of course
that opened up an entirely new field for
speculation.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord!”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is rather surprising, isn’t it?” Roger
continued equably. “That set my brain galloping
away like wildfire, I need hardly tell you; and five
minutes later the whole thing became absolutely
plain to me. I’m a little hazy about some of the
details, of course, but the broad lines are clear
enough.”</p>

<p>“You mean you guessed who the second woman
was?”</p>

<p>“Hardly guessed. I knew at once who she must
be.”</p>

<p>“Who?” Alec asked, with unconcealed
eagerness.</p>

<p>“Wait a bit. I’m coming to that. Well, then I
began to put two and two together. I’d got a pretty
shrewd idea already of the personal appearance
of the man himself.”</p>

<p>“Oh, it was a man then?”</p>

<p>“Yes, it was a man right enough. There was
never any doubt that a man must have done the
actual killing. No woman would have been strong
enough for the struggle that must have taken place.
Stanworth was no weakling, so that gives us the
fact that the man must have been a strong, burly
sort of person. From the footprint and the length
of those strides across the bed he was evidently
both tall and largely built; from the clever way in
which everything was left he must have been
possessed of a fund of cunning; from the manner in
which he left that window fastened behind him it
was clear that he was thoroughly accustomed to
handling lattice windows. Well, what does all that
give us? It looked obvious to me.”</p>

<p>Alec was staring intently at the speaker,
following every word with eager attention. “I think I see
what you’re getting at,” he said slowly.</p>

<p>“I thought you would,” said Roger cheerfully.
“Of course there were other things that clinched it.
The disappearance of that footprint, for instance.
That <em>must</em> have been done by somebody who knew
what he was doing. And somebody who heard me
say that I was going to fit every male boot in the
house into the mark, you remember. Of course it
was that which made me so sure at first about
Jefferson, because I jumped to the conclusion that
it must have been Jefferson whom we saw edging
out of the library door. After that I more or less
had Jefferson on the brain.”</p>

<p>“I did my best to put you off that track,” said
Alec with a slight smile.</p>

<p>“Oh, you did. It wasn’t your fault that I clung
to him so persistently.”</p>

<p>“I tried hard to stop you putting your foot in it,
if you remember.”</p>

<p>“I know. And I daresay it’s lucky you did. I
might have put things a good deal more plainly to
him, with extremely awkward results, if you hadn’t
dinned it into me so hard.”</p>

<p>“Well,” Alec said slowly, “what are you going
to do about it, now you’ve presumably got at the
truth at last?”</p>

<p>“Do about it? Forget it, of course. I told you
my views just now, when I said the man who
killed Stanworth ought to be acclaimed as a public
benefactor. As that is unfortunately out of the
question, the next best thing is to forget as
diligently as possible that Stanworth did not after all
shoot himself, as everybody else believes.”</p>

<p>“Humph!” said Alec, gazing out of the window.
“I wonder! You’re really sure of that?”</p>

<p>“Absolutely,” said Roger with decision.
“Anything else would be ludicrous under the
circumstances. We won’t discuss that side of it again.”</p>

<p>There was a little pause.</p>

<p>“The—the second woman,” Alec said
tentatively. “How were you able to identify her so
positively?”</p>

<p>Roger drew the envelope out of his breast pocket,
opened it, and carefully extracted the hair. He
laid it across his knee for the moment and
contemplated it in silence. Then with a sudden movement
he picked it up and threw it through the open
window.</p>

<p>“There goes a vital piece of evidence,” he said
with a smile. “Well, for one thing, there was
nobody else in the house with just that particular
shade of hair, was there?”</p>

<p>“I suppose not,” Alec replied.</p>

<p>There was another silence, rather longer this
time.</p>

<p>Then Roger, glancing curiously across at his
companion, remarked very airily:</p>

<p>“Just to satisfy my natural curiosity, Alec, why
exactly <em>did</em> you kill Stanworth?”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch28">

<h2>CHAPTER XXVIII. <br/> What Really Did Happen</h2>

<p>Alec contemplated the tips of his shoes for a
moment. Then he looked up suddenly. “It wasn’t
exactly murder, you know,” he said abruptly.</p>

<p>“Certainly not,” Roger agreed. “It was a
well-merited execution.”</p>

<p>“No, I don’t mean that. I mean, if I hadn’t
killed Stanworth, he would probably have killed
me. It was partly self-defence. I’ll tell you the
whole story in a minute.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I should like to hear what really happened.
That is, if you feel yourself at liberty to tell me, of
course. I don’t want to force confidences about—well,
about the second lady in the case.”</p>

<p>“About Barbara? Oh, there’s nothing that
reflects on her, and I think you ought to hear the
truth. I always meant to tell you the whole thing
if you found out that I did it, and of course, if you
were intending to take any drastic step, such as
telling the police or trying to get Jefferson arrested.
That’s why I made you promise to tell me before
you did anything like that.”</p>

<p>“Quite so,” Roger nodded understandingly.
“A good many things are plain to me now. Why
you hung back so much and were so unenthusiastic
and threw cold water on everything and pretended
to be so dull and refused to believe that a murder
had been committed at all, although I’d proved it
to you beyond any shadow of doubt.”</p>

<p>“I was trying to keep you off the right track all
the time. I really never thought you’d find out.”</p>

<p>“Perhaps I shouldn’t have done if the significance
of that hair hadn’t dawned on me at last. After
that everything seemed to come in a series of
flashes. Even then I might not have hit on the truth
with such certainty if two particular photographs
hadn’t suddenly developed themselves in my
mind.”</p>

<p>“Tell me all your side of it, then I’ll tell you
mine.”</p>

<p>“Very well. As I said, that hair was the clue to
the whole thing. I’d taken it quite idly out of
my pocket out there in the garden and was having
a look at it, when it suddenly struck me that
whosoever it might be it was certainly not one of Mrs.
Plant’s. I stared at it hard enough then, I can tell
you, and the second realization occurred to me that,
from the colour at any rate, it looked
uncommonly like one of Barbara’s. Then the first of the
pictures flashed across my mind. It was of Graves
sorting the post just before lunch yesterday. He
had only three letters, and they were all of exactly
the same appearance; same shaped envelopes and
typewritten addresses. One was for Mrs. Plant,
one for Jefferson—and one for Barbara. The first
two I’d already accounted for, now I seemed to be
accounting for the third. Add to all that Barbara’s
ill-concealed agitation the next morning and the
fact that, for no apparent cause whatever, she
broke off her engagement to you at the same time,
and the thing was as plain as daylight—Barbara
was also in the library that night and for some
reason or other the poor kid had got into Stanworth’s
clutches.”</p>

<p>“<em>She</em> hadn’t,” Alec put in. “It was——”</p>

<p>“All right, Alec; you can tell me all that in the
proper place. Let me finish my story first. Well,
having got so far, of course I asked myself—What
light does this throw on Stanworth’s death? Does
it give a definite pointer to any person? The answer
was obvious. Mr. Alexander Grierson! I gasped at
first, I can assure you, but when I got rather more
used to the idea, daylight simply flooded in. First
of all, there was your hanging back all the time;
that began to take on a very significant aspect.
Then there was your height and your strength,
which fitted in very nicely, and I knew that your
place in Worcestershire, where you must have
spent most of your boyhood, is liberally supplied
with lattice windows, so that you might be
expected to be up to all the tricks of the trade
regarding them. So far, in fact, so good.”</p>

<p>“But what about that footprint? I thought I’d
managed that rather neatly. By Jove, I remember
the shock you gave me when you discovered that
and the way I got out of the library that night.
I’d thought that was absolutely untraceable.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that did give me an awkward couple of
minutes, until I remembered that you’d run back
to get your pipe while I was talking to the
chauffeur! And that’s where the second of my little
pictures comes in. The scene flashed across my mind
on that flower bed just after you had stepped on to
the path when we were trying to find out who had
been in the library and before you smoothed out the
fresh footprints you’d made. The old and the new
prints were absolutely identical, you see. I suppose
I must have noted it subconsciously at the time
without realizing its significance.”</p>

<p>“I noticed it all right,” Alec said grimly. “It
gave me a bad turn for the moment.”</p>

<p>“After that all sorts of little things occurred to
me,” Roger continued. “I began to test each of
the facts I’d collected, and in each case the
explanation was now obvious. Those letters, for instance.
I knew they must have been posted between five
and eight-thirty that morning; and at eight o’clock
behold you coming back from the village and
actually saying you’d been down there to post
a letter!”</p>

<p>“Couldn’t think of any other explanation on the
spur of the moment,” Alec grinned ruefully.</p>

<p>“Yes, and curiously enough I questioned the
bookmaker motif at the time, didn’t I? Then there
was your quite genuine anxiety to stop me from
assuming complicity on the part of Mrs. Plant. I
suppose you knew all the time about her and
Stanworth, didn’t you?”</p>

<p>Alec nodded. “I was present at the interview
between them,” he said briefly.</p>

<p>“The devil you were!” Roger exclaimed in
surprise. “I never gathered that. She didn’t say
anything about it.”</p>

<p>“She didn’t know. I’ll tell you all about that.
Anything else on your side?”</p>

<p>Roger considered. “No, I don’t think so. I
gathered that you had somehow got to know that
Stanworth was blackmailing Barbara, and had
simply waded in and shot him, as any other decent
chap would have done in your place. That’s the
gist of it.”</p>

<p>“Well,” Alec said slowly, “there’s a little more
in it than that. I’d better begin right at the
beginning, I think. As you know, Barbara and I
had got engaged that afternoon. Well, I suppose
you can imagine that a thing like that rather
unsettles a chap. Anyhow, the upshot was that
when I got to bed that night I found I couldn’t
sleep. I tried for some time, and then I gave it
up as hopeless and looked round the room for a
book. There was nothing I particularly wanted
to read there, so I thought I’d slip down to the
library and get one. Of course I had no idea that
everyone wouldn’t be in bed, so I didn’t trouble
to put on a dressing-gown but just went down as
I was, in pyjamas. There were no lights on the
landing or in the hall, but to my surprise when I
got there I found all the lights in the library full on.
However, there wasn’t anyone inside and the door
was open, so I went in and began to look round
the shelves. Then I heard unmistakably feminine
footsteps approaching and, hardly wishing to be
caught like that, I nipped behind those thick
curtains in front of the sash window and sat down on
the seat to wait till the person, whoever it might
be, had gone. I thought it was someone come down
like me for a book, and probably also more or less
in a state of undress. Not that I really thought
much about it at all. I just didn’t want to be mixed
up in a rather embarrassing situation.”</p>

<p>“Quite natural,” Roger murmured. “Yes?”</p>

<p>“Through the chink in the curtains I could see
that it was Mrs. Plant. She was still in evening
dress, and I saw at once that she looked rather
worried. Very worried, in fact. She began to
wander aimlessly about the room, twisting her
handkerchief about in her hands and it looked
rather as if she’d been crying. Then Stanworth
came in.”</p>

<p>“Ah!”</p>

<p>Alec hesitated. “I don’t want to exaggerate
or turn on the pathetic tap too much,” he resumed
a little awkwardly, “but I hope to God I never
have to see anything again like the scene that
followed. Roger, it was almost unbearable! I don’t
know how I sat it out without dashing through the
curtains and getting my hands into Stanworth’s
throat; but I had the sense to see that anything
like that would only make matters very much
worse. Have you ever seen a woman in agony? My
God, it was absolutely heart-rending. I could never
have imagined that a man could be such an
indescribable brute.”</p>

<p>He paused, shivering slightly, and Roger
watched him sympathetically. He was beginning
to realise just how terrible that scene must have
been, if it could move the stoical Alec to such a
display of emotion.</p>

<p>“You know the main lines of what happened,
don’t you?” Alec went on, rather more calmly.
“So I needn’t go into details. The wretched woman
begged and wept, but it had no more effect upon
Stanworth than if he had been a stone image. He
just went on smiling that infernal, cynical smile
and told her not to make such an unnecessary fuss.
Then he made that suggestion to her that you told
me about, and for the moment I very nearly saw
red. As for her, it finished her off completely.
She just crumpled up on the chesterfield and didn’t
say another word. A few minutes later she got
up and tottered out of the room. Then I came out
of my hiding place.”</p>

<p>“Good man,” Roger murmured.</p>

<p>“Well, of course I knew by this time just how
the land lay. I knew what Stanworth was, and I
knew where he kept his evidence against these
people. I didn’t quite know what I was going to do,
but it was pretty clear that something had got to
be done. Well, he was a bit startled at first, but
recovered himself wonderfully and began to be
infernally sarcastic and cynical. I told him that I
wasn’t going to stand the sort of thing I’d just
seen; and unless he stopped the whole thing and
let me burn all the evidence he’d been talking
about, I’d go straight to the police and tell them
all about it. That seemed to amuse him quite a
lot; and he pointed out that if I did that,
everything would come to light which all these people
had been paying money to keep concealed, and
they’d all be very much worse off than before.
That had never occurred to me, and I was rather
taken aback for the minute; then I told him that if
that was the case I’d unlock the safe myself, even
if I had to lay him out to get the key. He simply
laughed and tossed his keys on the table. ‘That’s
the one for the safe,’ he said. ‘I don’t quite know
how you’re going to open it as you happen to be
ignorant of the combination, but doubtless you
have provided for that contingency.’ Of course
that took me in the wind again, but before I could
answer him I heard somebody coming down the
stairs.</p>

<p>“ ‘Ah!’ he said. ‘I was quite forgetting. I’ve
got another visitor coming to see me to-night.
As you seem to have mixed yourself up in my
affairs, the least I can do is to invite you to be
present at this interview also. Get behind that
curtain again, and I think I can promise you an
interesting quarter of an hour.’</p>

<p>“Well, I hesitated, while the footsteps began to
cross the hall, till he caught me by the arm and sort
of snarled, ‘Get out of sight, you fool. Can’t you
see you’ll make it ten times worse for her by letting
her see you?’</p>

<p>“Even then I didn’t realise what he meant, but
I saw that there was something in what he said,
and just managed to get behind the curtain in
time. You can imagine what I felt like when the
door opened and I saw Barbara come into the
room.”</p>

<p>“Ghastly!” Roger exclaimed with feeling.</p>

<p>“Ghastly! That’s putting it mildly. Well, I’m
not going to tell you the details of what happened
then, because there’s really no need to and it’s only
giving people away unnecessarily. All I need say
is that Stanworth had got hold of some information
about—well, about Mrs. Shannon. I don’t even
know what it was. He ostentatiously pulled a
revolver out of his desk, opened the safe, and
showed her two or three pieces of paper, holding
them so that she could read them without taking
them into her hands. Then he told her to sit down
on the settee to talk things over, keeping the
revolver in front of him on the desk all the time.
Well, Barbara sat down, looking very white and
frightened, poor kid, but still not knowing in the
least what Stanworth was getting at. He didn’t
keep her in ignorance long. He just leaned back
in his chair, informed her calmly that if she didn’t
fall in with his wishes he’d make the information
he’s just shown her public property and calmly
proceeded to state his terms.</p>

<p>“Lord, Roger, old man, I had some difficulty in
holding myself in. What do you think he wanted?
He told her absolutely plainly that what he was
after was money, and went on to say that he knew
quite well that she herself hadn’t got enough to
satisfy him. Therefore she’d got to marry me within
a month, so that she would be able to pay the
very moderate sums which he would from time to
time require. She could either tell me or not, as she
saw fit; it didn’t matter to him in the least. If she
refused, he was very much afraid she and her
mother would have to take the consequences.</p>

<p>“Of course you see what he was getting at. Me!
He was practically saying to me that if I didn’t
marry her and pay his blackmail, he would
disgrace and ruin the mother of the girl I loved.
Very neat sort of trap, wasn’t it? Incidentally, he
went on to point out, also for my benefit, that it
wasn’t the least use trying to do him any sort of
bodily harm, because that would only bring things
to a head in the way you know, and he never
opened the safe without a loaded revolver in his
hand, which he wouldn’t hesitate for a second to
use if it became necessary.</p>

<p>“Well, Barbara behaved like an absolute thoroughbred.
In fact, she told him, in so many words,
to go to the devil; she wouldn’t dream of involving
me in the affair, and as for her and her mother,
they’d have to take what was coming to them if he
chose to behave in such a damnable way, but
they’d take it alone. Great Scott, she was
wonderful! She practically defied him to do his worst, and
said that she was going to break off her engagement
to me the very next morning. Then she sailed out
of the room with her head in the air, leaving him
sitting there. No tears, no entreaties; simply the
most overwhelming contempt. Roger, she was just
marvellous!”</p>

<p>“I can believe you,” Roger said simply. “What
happened then?”</p>

<p>“I came out again. I think I meant to kill
Stanworth then if I got a chance to do so without
making a worse mess of things. Remember, I
knew already to what lengths he was ready to push
the wretched women that he had in his clutches,
and though Barbara would certainly never give
way to him an inch, I wasn’t so sure about Mrs.
Shannon. Well, there was the safe still open, and
there was Stanworth sitting in his chair with the
revolver in his hand. He looked at me with a grin
as I appeared, and said he hoped I hadn’t been too
bored. I walked straight up to him without a word
(I was beyond talking by then), and I suppose he
could see from my face what I had in mind.
Anyhow, when I was only a few feet away he whipped
up the revolver and fired. Luckily he missed, and
I heard the vase shatter behind me. I lunged
forward, grabbed his wrist and used all my strength
to twist it round till the muzzle was pointing
straight at his own forehead. Then I simply
tightened my finger over his on the trigger and shot him.</p>

<p>“I didn’t stop to think what I was doing, or
anything like that; I hardly imagine I was capable
of thought at the moment. I just knew that
Stanworth had got to be killed, in the same way that
one knows that a mad dog or a rat or any other
vermin has got to be killed. In fact, once he was
dead, I hardly paid any more attention to him at
all. He was a filthy thing wiped out, and that’s all
there was about it. I never felt, nor have felt since,
a single moment’s compunction. I suppose it’s
curious in a way.”</p>

<p>“You’d have been a sentimental fool if you
had,” Roger said with decision.</p>

<p>“Well, I suppose I’m not a sentimental fool
then,” Alec replied with a slight smile; “for I
most certainly haven’t. Well, as soon as the man
was dead I became as cool as ice. I knew exactly,
almost without thinking about it, what had got to
be done. First of all, and in case I was interrupted,
the evidence in the safe had got to be destroyed,
and then I had to make my escape. It didn’t take
long to burn the documents in the safe. There
was one shelf full of them, all done up in envelopes
inscribed with various addresses; about sixteen
or seventeen altogether, I suppose. I burnt them
in the hearth without opening them, and just ran
through the contents of the other shelves to make
sure that I hadn’t missed anything.</p>

<p>“Up till then, mind, it had never occurred to
me that the case would ever appear to be anything
but murder; and if it was traced back to me, I
should simply say that I had shot him in
self-defence, after he had first shot at me. I would have
gone to the police straight away and told them the
whole thing, if it wasn’t that that would have
given away the facts of blackmail, which it was of
course essential to hush up. Then I glanced at the
chair in which he was lying, and it struck me that
he looked exactly as if he had shot himself, so I
began to wonder if I couldn’t make the whole
thing look like suicide.</p>

<p>“I knew you weren’t such a blithering fool as
you’ve been trying to make yourself out to be for
the last forty-eight hours——”</p>

<p>Roger interjected, “Yes?”</p>

<p>“Well, the whole finished effect didn’t occur to
me at once. I started off by shutting the safe and
putting the keys back in his waistcoat pocket; the
wrong pocket, as it turned out afterwards. Then I
cleared up the bits of vase and shoved them into
my pocket for the time being, and examined the
revolver in Stanworth’s hand. To my joy, I found
that I could get at the chamber and extract the
first shell without loosening his grip, which I
proceeded to do. You were right about my knowledge
of lattice windows. I knew that trick with the
handle when I was a boy, and patted myself on the
back when I realised how I could get out of the
room and leave everything locked behind me. Lord,
I never thought anyone would spot that!”</p>

<p>“You weren’t reckoning for me to be on the
trail, my boy,” Roger said with modest pride.</p>

<p>“Well, you certainly made me jump when you
discovered it. Let’s see now, what did I do next?
Oh, yes, the letters. I knew that all these people
would be scared to death at the idea of Stanworth
having shot himself with the safe still locked, as
even if they had the keys nobody could open it
without the combination; and I thought that in
the agitation of the moment Mrs. Plant or
somebody might give some vital point away. So I sat
down and hammered out letters to the three of
them on the typewriter, for I knew by what I’d
seen in the safe that both Jefferson and Lady
Stanworth were involved in it also. You know what
I said in the letters, of course. Well, then, I had a
final look round and just by chance thought I’d
better glance into the waste-paper basket. The
very first thing I saw there was a sheet of paper,
only very slightly crumpled, that bore Stanworth’s
signature. Instantly I thought to myself—why
not rig up a statement of suicide just to clinch
things? And I typed one out above the signature.</p>

<p>“Of course all this took a devil of a time. In fact,
it was about four o’clock by now. I’d been as
cool as a cucumber for two hours, but I was getting
so tired that I made one or two mistakes after that.
I never searched the waste-paper basket, for
instance, and so left that other piece of paper with
the signature there for you to find; and I forgot
to smooth over that footprint on the bed. I did
curse myself for that when you found it! Also I
ought not to have thrown those bits of vase into
the shrubbery between the library and the dining
room, I suppose.”</p>

<p>“But how did you get back into the house?”
Roger asked.</p>

<p>“Oh, before I locked up the library I went
through and opened the dining-room windows.
Then I just walked round from the lattice window
and in through the dining room, locked the
dining-room door, and went up to bed. And that’s all.”</p>

<p>“And very nicely timed,” Roger remarked,
glancing out of the window. “We shall be at
Victoria in five minutes. Well, thanks very much
for telling me like that, Alec. And now let us
proceed madly to forget all about it, shall we?”</p>

<p>“There’s one thing that’s been worrying me
rather,” Alec said slowly. “Do you think I ought
to tell Barbara?”</p>

<p>“Good heavens above, no!” Roger shouted,
staring at his companion in dismay. “What on
earth would you want to tell her for? She’d only
be overcome with shame that you knew anything
about her mother’s shortcomings; and the fact that
you’d killed a man more or less on account of her
would simply make her wretchedly miserable. Of
course you mustn’t dream of telling her, you
goop!”</p>

<p>“I think you’re probably right,” Alec said,
gazing out of the window.</p>

<p>The train began to slacken speed, and the long,
snaky Victoria platforms appeared in sight. Roger
stood up and began to lift his suitcase off the rack.</p>

<p>“I think we might stay up in town this evening
and do a dinner and a show, don’t you?” he said
cheerfully. “I feel as if I want a little relaxation
after my strenuous mental efforts of the last two
days.”</p>

<p>Something seemed to be troubling Alec.</p>

<p>“You know,” he said awkwardly, “somehow I
can’t help wondering. Are you really sure, Roger,
that it wouldn’t be best for me to go and tell the
police? I mean, it isn’t as if they’d have me up
for a murder or anything like that; nothing worse
than manslaughter, I should imagine. And I
daresay I should get off altogether on the
self-defence idea. But are you sure it isn’t really the
right thing to do?”</p>

<p>Roger gazed down at his companion with
disfavour.</p>

<p>“For heaven’s sake, Alec, <em>do</em> try sometimes not
to be so disgustingly conventional!” he said
scornfully.</p>

<p class="finis">The End</p>


</div>

</body>
</html>